ARMINIUS: OR THE CHAMPION OF LIBERTY, A TRAGEDY. WITH AN HISTORICAL PREFACE.BY ARTHUR MURPHY, ESQ.Arminius Liberator haud dubie Germaniae, et qui non primordia Populi Romani, sicut alii Reges Ducesque, sed florentissimum Imperium lacessierit, Praeliis ambiguus, Bello non Victus.
Tacit. Annal. Lib. ii. S. 88.LONDON: PRINTED BY AND FOR BARKER AND SON,Dramatic Repository, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, COVENT GARDEN: [Price 2s 6dWhere may be had, THE AUTHOR's OTHER WORKS.PREFACE.THE following Poem was written in the course of the last summer. Why it was not offered to the Stage, it is unnecessary to mention. If it could in any degree answer the purpose, for which it was originally designed, it would not be, as perhaps now is the case, a mere trifle offered to the Public. The Author is conscious that his powers are neither equal to the subject, nor to the zeal with which he undertook it. Removed though he is from the political world, he could not, in his private retreat, be altogether inattentive to the various events, which in the last seven years have changed the face of Europe, and, under the savage conduct of a Nation of professed Atheists, counteracted the order of Providence in the formation of
Civil Society. Nihil est illi Principi Deo, qui omnem hunc Mundum regit, quod quidem in terris fiat acceptius, quam Concilia Coetus que hominum jure Sociati, quoe CIVITATES appellanturSomn. Scip. S. iii.. He saw the Monarchy of France overturned by the fury of a Democratic Faction, who have since reduced their whole Nation to a state of Slavery not to be paralelled in the Records of History. FIVE MEN called the DIRECTORY, have silenced the Legislature of their country; they transported Seventy of the Members to perish on a foreign shore, and from that time have not suffered their NATIONAL ASSEMBLY to enter into a Debate, or to pass a single Law.The Usurpers at first covered their ambition with the mask of Patriots struggling for Liberty; and, as soon as they found themselves possessed of Power, they destroyed LIBERTY ITSELF. With men of their stamp the practice has been uniformly the same from the days of Tacitus to the present hour. Ut Imperium evertant, LIBERTATEM praeferunt; sr Everterint, LIBERTATEM IPSAM aggrediuntur Annal. Lib. xvi. S. 22.
When the Revolution began in France, the People of England did not look much deeper than the surface; the love of innovation was for some time thought to be zeal for civil liberty; and by great politicians and eminent orators it was called The FABRIC OF HUMAN WISDOM. That doctrine was spread far and wide, and honest men were deceived by appearances. In the mean time a JACOBIN PARTY was formed in various parts of England by CONSTITUTIONAL CLUBS and CORRESPONDING SOCIETIES. Republicans in their hearts they pretended to act with ardour for the Constitution. They talked of the RIGHTS OF MAN, of REFORM OF PARLIAMENT, and UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE, while in secret they wished for nothing so much as to see the horrors of French Anarchy introduced into this kingdom. They knew that in a thunder-storm the dregs of the barrel rise to the top. They had read in the fable, that when the oak and the cedar were felled to the ground, the bramble reigned over the forest. Having nothing to lose, they hoped in a convulsion of the state, that they should find their private advantage. The same views and principles in every age and country
have been the motives of all pernicious citizens. The English JACOBINS, as well as the FRENCH, may find their picture drawn by the masterly pencil of Tacitus. Falso LIBERTATIS nomen obtendi ab üs, qui PRIVATIM DEGENERES, in publicum EXITIOSI, nihil spei nisi per discordias habeantAnn. Lib. xi. S. 17.While our home-bred Factions were employed at Sheffield, Norwich, Manchester, London, and other places, in laying the seedplots of Rebellion, this country was on a sudden involved in a just, a necessary, an UNAVOIDABLE War. Unavoidable it must be called, since the REGICIDES thought fit to be the AGGRESSORS. This point has been warmly controverted, and much ink has been lavished on the subject. The present writer does not mean to enter the lists with any person whatever: he only claims a right to think for himself, and, with all possible brevity, to exhibit the light in which things appeared to him.It has been said that Great Britain provoked the war by the recall of her Ambassador. But that event took place after the 10th of
August, 1792, when the King of France was suspended from all the functions of his office, and sent, with the Royal Family, a prisoner to the Temple. The credentials of the Ambassador were then no longer valid. With whom was he to transact business? Was it to be matter of indifference, whether he negotiated with the King, to whom he was sent, or with the BRISSOTS, the MARATS, the ROBESPIERES, and the rest of that Pandaemonium? Would such a conduct have been suited to the honour of the British Nation? It would have been nothing short of a decided part in the internal affairs of France. Had LORD GOWER remained at Paris, he would have been in a precarious situation. He had seen the massacre of the 10th of August: Was he to wait for that of the 2d of September, when no less than three thousand men, women, and children, were most barbarously murdered? The French have lately shewn that they can trample on the rights of ambassadors: They confined the ambassador of Portugal in a prison, and might have behaved with equal insolence to LORD GOWER. In such a juncture, his Majesty thought it became his dignity to send letters of recall, declaring, at the
same time, that he would not interfere in the internal government of that kingdom. If the French, who are now affiliating, that is enslaving GENEVA, will enquire for the works of BURLAMAQUI, they will find that the recall of an ambassador, or a refusal to receive one, may proceed from various causes, without being deemed a sufficient provocation of war. It should seem that the French themselves were of that opinion, since it appears, that M. LE BRUN, at that time Minister for Foreign Affairs, in his answer to the communication made to him by LORD GOWER, expressed his wish, that a full reciprocity of justice and good-will might subsist between the two countries.With what sincerity the Republican Anarchists acted on that occasion, may be inferred from their Decree of the 19th November, 1792, by which they promised fraternity and support to the People of every country, who wished to overturn their Government. It is almost superfluous to add, that in answer to Frost and Joel Barlow, the President of the Convention hoped the day was not far distant, when he should send congratulations to a similar National Convention in England.
It is well known, that an inundation of French Jacobins, whom their o'ercloy'd country vomited forth to propagate their detestable principles, infested every part of London: In such a period the ALIEN BILL was a wife and necessary measure: and it may now well be a question, whether it ought not to be declared perpetual. Whenever a Peace shall be concluded, a banditti of Frenchmen, under the pretext of trade and commerce, will be sent over to wage a war of principles against the Government.In the latter end of the year 1792, the demagogues of Paris were resolved on two grand objects, namely, the murder of their King, and a war with Great Britain. The former was executed on the 21st of January 1793; on the 24th of the same month M. Chauvelin received orders to depart. Though it was well known, that long before that time he had renounced his King, who had sent him hither, and sworn fidelity to his new masters; and though his machinations in this country were well known, he was, notwithstanding, suffered to remain as long as Lewis XVI. was permitted to live. His
credentials expired with his martyred Sovereign. His character of ambassador was terminated by the fatal murder of his most Christian Majesty. To have received him with new credentials from the regicides, would have been incompatible with the moral dignity of the British Nation.The rulers of Paris, having destroyed their, King, proceeded to their long-projected war against Great Britain. In their debate on that subject, on the 1st of February 1793, it was asserted by one of their orators, That the watchful conduct of the British Ministers, their fears, and jealousies afforded proofs of the progress of the opinions and principles of the French RevolutionSee Debrett's Collection of Addresses from English Clubs, published in the year 1793. Is not that avowal from the mouth of an enemy, a full justification of the ALIEN BILL? It was further asserted by Brissot, that the British Ministers, for the sake of the trade and commerce of England, observed a STRICT NEUTRALITY. If corroborating proof of this pacific disposition were necessary, we have the authority of the MARQUIS DE BOUILLE. That great Officer, known and
respected throughout Europe, informs us, that he attended the King of Prussia and the Emperor Leopold at Pilnitz, on the 22d of August, 1791, when these two powers formed a Treaty of Alliance; and in the month of September following, he was received in the Cabinet at Vienna, and there the Emperor told him, that he had been waiting for answers from the Courts of Russia, Spain, England, and the principal Sovereigns of Italy, and had at length received them, and was assured of the assistance and co-operation of all those powers, EXCEPT ENGLAND, which had expressed its determination to OBSERVE A STRICT NEUTRALITY See the Marquis de Bouille's Memoirs of the French Revolution, page 422.What, in the mean time, was the real disposition of the French towards Great Britain? Mr. HARPER, one of the Representatives in the American Congress, has laid open the intrigues, the stratagems, and over-bearing insolence of the French, from the very beginning of the Revolution. He tells us in express terms, that their grand object was to destroy the trade of Great Britain. And
this was to be effected by setting fire to the four corners of Europe, and exciting the People in every quarter to insurrection against their Government. A project so atrocious in its end, and so abominable in its means, has never been conceived before. And while all this was going on, the Convention, in order to hoodwink England, was making to her the most solemn assurances of pacific intentions. It even carried its dissimulation to the almost incredible length of requesting the mediation of England to bring about a Peace with Prussia and the Emperor. In the mean time, their instructions to GENET, (their Envoy to America) shewed, that it was their manifest object to draw the United States into a war with Great Britain. Those instructions were dated January 3d, 1793. Supplementary instructions were delivered by the same person, January 17th, 1793. Louis XVI. was guillotined January 21st, 1793; Chauvelin was ordered to quit England, January 24th, 1793, and war was declared against England on the 1st of February following. If the dismissal of Chauvelin was the occasion of the war, as France alledged, why those instructions on the 3d of January so long before the dismissal?
The Leaders of Opposition in England have long persisted in the error of regarding only the DECLARATIONS of France, and wholly overlooking her ACTIONS See Harper's Pamphlet, Page 94, 95..If the war was at first unavoidable, it is now just and necessary, as appears from the behaviour of the Directory to LORD MALMESBURY. That Nobleman, invested with the character of Plenipotentiary, offered in the very outset of the negotiation at Lisle, the terms of Peace drawn up in the form of a Treaty, which the enemy, had they been in earnest, might have embraced with little or no delay; but, contrary to all precedent, they recalled at the end of near three months, the Plenipotentiaries, who possessed the thread of the whole negotiation, and sent two new Agents to Lisle, with a settled design, in the most abrupt manner, to end all further Treaty. Those new Agents by a note, dated the 16th of September, desired to know whether Lord Malmesbury had powers to give up to France and her Allies, all places conquered by Great Britain. They were told by his Lordship, that a decisive answer in the
negative had been given on the 24th of July preceding. This was of no weight. A Peer of Great Britain, and a Plenipotentiary Ambassador, was ordered in the most insolent manner to go and return, that is to fetch and carry for an insolent Directory, who have emerged from obscurity, to be the tyrants of their country. This demand of a general restitution is the more extravagant, because after the three great and glorious victories, unparalleled in the British Annals, by LORD HOWE over the French, by LORD ST. VINCENT over the Spaniards, and lastly, by LORD DUNCAN over the Dutch, it is not in their power to retake any one place that has been conquered from them. Rafts and gunboats will not be able to cope with the British Navy.It has been asked in the House of Commons, "Are we to persist in the war for the possession of the Cape of GOOD HOPE, the Island of CEYLON, and Trincomale?" The following Extract from the Marquis de Bouille's Memoirs, will be a sufficient answer to the question. "In the summer of 1784," says that great General, when I was preparing to set out from BERLIN to RUSSIA, I received an
order from Government to return to Paris. On my arrival there, the Minister acquainted me with a project relative to the East Indies. The object was, to unite the French and Dutch forces in an attack upon the English possessions, to restore to the Princes of the Country the Provinces conquered from them by the English, and to obtain and secure for the two nations Factories and Commercial Establishments, which were to be free to the whole world. The means employed to secure success to this enterprize, were an army of 18,000 men, independent of the garrisons already in that country; twenty millions of livres in specie, and a Naval force able to oppose that of the English in the East Indies. TRINCOMALE, in the Island of CEYLON, was the place destined for the rendezvous of the troops, and the repository of the military magazines. One third of the forces, as well as of the sums necessary, and the stores and provisions of every kind were to be furnished by the Dutch, who requested that I should have the command of the expedition. In 1787, the Revolution broke out in Holland; but was suppressed
pressed by the entry of a Prussian army under the command of the DUKE OF BRUNSWICK. All the bonds which united FRANCE and HOLLAND were dissolved, the former basely abandoning her Ally, and thus the vast project of the conquest of the Indies vanished into air The Marquis de Bouille's Memoirs, Page 41..It is to be observed, that the above project was in 1784, not more than a year after a General Peace, when nothing had occurred that could give umbrage to France. The same rooted aversion to this country 'still subsists, and is openly avowed by the Directory: and, after this statement, is TRINCOMALE an object of importance to this country? Shall it be given up to be the rendezvous of the enemy's troops, and the repository of their magazines? To do it, were to be felo de se.Ever since the return of Lord Malmesbury, the Directory have waged a war of Billinsgate against this country. With scurrility, calumny, and the grossest falsehoods, they have attempted to traduce and vilify a great nation, celebrated throughout Europe for its
humanity no less than its valour. They have declared that the English are a generous people labouring under a bad government, and they are determined to give them on the the Royal Exchange a better constitution. Infatuated men! They had in the beginning of their Revolution the British Constitution as a model to imitate, but they preferred Anarchy. As Montesquieu expresses it, they had BYZANTIUM before their eyes, and they built CHALCEDON. They have affiliated HOLLAND, BELGIUM, the States of Italy, and GENEVA, and they have robbed and plundered them all. It now remains for them to destroy the Commerce of Great Britain, and to erect their TRI-COLOURED FLAG on the Royal Exchange. For this purpose they have solicited subscriptions in their own exhausted country, but by that measure they rouzed the spirit of the British Nation. All degrees and ranks of men have conspired with emulation to strengthen the hands of Government, and from the Contributions paid in at the Bank, three things are manifest: First, that the people are united, with one mind, one heart, one hand, against the
attempts of a French banditti: Secondly, that this is an opulent country, ready and willing to strengthen the hands of Government: And thirdly, the Voluntary Subscriptions shew, that all ranks and orders of men repose entire confidence in his Majesty's Councils, and his present Ministers. The consequence of this unanimity and firmness, it is hoped, will be the support of the extensive commerce of this country, and the empire of the sea.Quicunque Mundi terminus obstitit,Hunc tangat armis; visere g stiens,Qua parte debacchentur Ignes,Quâ Nebulae, pluviique Rores. Horace, Lib. III. Ode 3.The situation, it must be granted, forms an awful period, and requires collected vigour, nothing less than the whole force of the community. And yet, at the same time, we still hear a clamour for RADICAL REFORM. That men of eminence in the state should at length join in such a cry is not a little surprizing. It may, therefore, not be improper to remind them, that on the trial of HARDY at the Old Baily, a letter to him
from the Society at Norwich was produced, containing the following passage: Whether it is the private design of the several Societies to rip UP MONARCHY BY THE ROOTS, and place DEMOCRACY in its stead? What was the answer? The Committee offer you every assistance in their power, but request that your questions for the future may relate chiefly to REFORM OF PARLIAMENT.Hardy's Trial, by Gurney, Vol. I. Page 223, 225 This the Corresponding Society avow as their ostensible object, but conceal their intention with regard to Monarchy. When men of rank and ability allow themselves, after all their efforts, to adopt the same clamour, they run the risk of being thought to follow HARDY'S advice. Whose advice they follow. when their voice is raised against every measure of Government, it is impossible to say. The suspension of the HABEAS CORPUS ACT is called a violent step, nothing less than a violation of the Constitution, an encroachment on the liberty of the subject, and, in short, a manifest prelude to the reign of terror. The reason assigned for this intemperate language is, that no proof of existing
plots against the State has been produced in Parliament. But that the Jacobins at Manchester, and other places, have been engaged in a conspiracy against this country is evident beyond the possibility of a doubt. And surely, the power of providing for the safety of a whole people is inherent in the frame and spirit of the Constitution. Let us hear what a WHIG of the OLD SCHOOL has said upon the subject. It is an absurdity to imagine that those, who have the authority of making laws, cannot suspend any particular law, when they think it expedient for the public. When, therefore, any law does not conduce to this great end, the very observation of it would endanger the community, and that law ought to be laid asleep for a limited time by proper authority. Every government must in its nature be armed with such a power. There cannot be a greater instance of this, than in the old Commonwealth of Rome, who flattered themselves with an opinion, that their government had in it a due temper of the Regal, Noble, and Popular Power, represented by the Consuls, the Senators, and the Tribunes. Nevertheless, in this government, when the Republic was threatened
with danger, they thought fit for the common safety to appoint a Temporary Dictator, invested with the whole power of the Three Branches; who when the danger was over, retired again into the community, and left the government, in its natural situation. The HABEAS CORPUS ACT was passed towards the end of Charles II.; and since that time has been suspended, twice under the reign of William and Mary, once under King William, and once in the reign of Queen Anne; and again in the year 1715 And besides, every unprejudiced man will consider how mildly and equitably this power has been used. The persons confined have been treated with all possible humanity, and abridged of nothing but the liberty of ruining themselves and their families.See the Freeholder, No. 17. What Mr. ADDISON has said of the Ministers of GEORGE I. may be applied to the Councils of his present Majesty, when the Habeas Corpus Act was suspended four years ago. The whole body of the people have equal confidence on the present occasion. But after all, ADDISON, it may be said, was a party writer.
MONTESQUIEU was neither WHIG nor TORY. His words are: Si la puissance legislative se croyoit en danger par quelque Conjuration Secrette contre L'Etat, ou quelque Intelligence avec les Enemis du dehors, Elle pourroit, pour un tems court et limité, permettre à a puisance Exécutrice de faire arrèter les Citoyens suspects, qui ne perdroient Leur Libertè pour un tems, que pour la conserver pour toujoursL'Esprit des Loix, Lib. xi. Cap. vi.The clamour of a few against the present suspension of the law is not the only mischief of the times. A MONSTER IN POLITICS has lately stalked forth as formidable as that described by LUCRETIUS,Horribili super aspectu mortalibus instans:This Phantom is, The SOVEREIGN MAJESTY OF THE PEOPLE; a FOURTH ESTATE set up in a country, that has been for ages governed by the Legislative Authority of THREE. If there is such a new order, it is of course paramount to KING, LORDS, and COMMONS, and, by consequence,
there is an end of our boasted Constitution. But where has this SOVEREIGN MAJESTY OF THE PEOPLE ever existed? At ATHENS the people had a share in the government, and the citizens of Rome, by their TRIBUNES, assumed and exercised enormous influence; but they had no SOVEREIGN MAJESTY. In process of time they both wrought their own ruin. The subjects of Great Britain are much wiser; they delegate their whole authority to their Representatives, and beyond that power they claim no authority. If The SOVEREIGN MAJESTY OF THE PEOPLE ever existed in any part of the known world, it must have been in a pure, unmixed, and persect DEMOCRACY. And where can such a government be traced? Polybius says, Rust is the inbred bane of iron, and worms of wood; and as those substances at last fall a prey to the evils that are congenial to their nature, in the same manner every SINGLE KIND OF GOVERNMENT breeds within itself some certain vice, which soon causes its destruction. Thus, ROYALTY degenerates into Tyranny; ARISTOCRACY into Oligarchy; and DEMOCRACY into Savage
ViolenceSee Polybius, Book vi. Chap, i.. Such is the natural progress of the simple forms of government. A mixed limited Monarchy has, in its well tempered contexture, the means within itself of checking every mischief: and till a wild Democracy has overturned all wholesome laws, The SOVEREIGN MAJESTY OF THE PEOPLE is gigantic nonsense, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing..The REFORM projected by the JACOBINS of this country, would, beyond all doubt, rip up the Constitution by the roots. At such a time, the Author of the following Scenes thought, if he could recall the minds of men to the origin and antiquity of the Constitution, under which the people have enjoyed their rights, their property, and their liberty for above five hundred years, his labours might have some tendency to stop the progress of the new philosophy, and check the spirit of innovation. Our form of government, as Motesquieu has truly observed, came to this country from the woods of Germany L'Esprit des Loix, Book. GAUL was reduced to a state of slavery, while Germany displayed a spirit of independance.
Arminius was the Great Hero of Germany. TACITUS tells us, That he fought with alternate vicissitudes of fortune: a man of warlike genius; and, beyond all question, the deliverer of Germany. He had not, like the Kings and Generals of a former day, the infancy of Rome to cope with; he had to struggle with a great and flourishing Empire: he attacked the Romans in the meridian of their glory; he stood at bay for a number of years with equivocal success, sometimes victorious, often defeated, but in the issue of the war, STILL UNCONQUERED. Annal. Lib. II. S. 88. It was from that northern hive that our Saxon ancestors brought with them the same spirit of liberty, and a plan of civil government. They had experienced in their own country the disadvantages of the general suffrage of the people in a mass; they had occasionally tried the more practicable mode of representation: Ut missis Legatis in Commune Consultarent, Libertas an Pax Placeret. They had recourse to the same expedient in England. The WITTENAGEMOT was accordingly established,
consisting of the King, the Barons, and the Saxon Freemen. The inferior orders of the people were still in bondage, but the remedy was soon applied. Letters of enfranchisement were granted not only to individuals, but to the inhabitants of towns and cities, who were admitted by their Representatives to a voice in the Great Council of the Nation. The consequence was, that the kingly power, the privileges of the nobility and clergy, and the rights of the commons were so happily blended, that "I believe," says Montesquieu, so happy a form of Government never presented itself to the mind of man L'Esprit des Loix. Lib. xi. Cap. vi, viii.. The Great Council of the Nation, called under the ANGLO SAXON GOVERNMENT, the WITTENAGEMOT, in process of time took the name of PARLIAMENT, and from that period has been the Palladium of British Liberty; a noble fabric, which our internal enemies would fain demolish by what they call a RADICAL REFORM.It is, however, to be hoped that a veneration for the antiquity of so glorious a Constitution, and a due sense of the blessings,
which mankind have enjoyed under it, will animate all true Englishmen against their enemies, whether foreign or domestic.The Author of Arminius has had the pleasure of working under a great master, and in the Notes annexed to the Tragedy, he has cited the passages which he has imitated, because he knows that the sentiments will come with weight and authority from the great writer of political history. That he has not been able to execute up to his own ideas and wishes, he is too conscious; but for a well-meant endeavour no apology can be required.Published by BARKER and SON, Great Russell-Street, Covent-Garden.NAVAL PILLAR, 1s by Mr. T. Dibdin,HORSE and the WIDOW, 1s by Mr. T. Dibdin,INDISCRETION, a Comedy, 2s 6d by P. Hoare, Esq.SIGHS, or the Daughter, Com. 2s by P. Hoare, Esq.CAPTIVE of SPILBURG, 1s 6d by P. Hoare, Esq.CHAINS OF THE HEART, 2s by P. Hoare, Esq.VORTIGERN, an Historical Tragedy, represented at the Theatre-Royal, Drury-Lane 4s; andHENRY THE SECOND, an Historical Drama; supposed to be written by the Author of Vortigern. 4sLONDON HERMIT; or, Rambles in Dorsetshire, 1s 6d by O'KeeffeLIFE's VAGARIES, a Comedy, 2s by O'KeeffeIRISH MIMIC; or, Blunders at Brighton, 1s by O'KeeffeLITTLE HUNCHBACK, 1s by O'KeeffeTONY LUMPKIN IN TOWN, 1s by O'KeeffeBIRTH DAY; or, the Prince of Arragen, 1s by O'KeeffeTHE VETERAN TAR, comic opera, 1s. by S. J. Arnold.SHIPWRECK, 1s by S. J. Arnold.THE BROTHERS, Comedy, 2s by CumberlandTHE IMPOSTORS, Comedy, 2s by CumberlandTHE BOX-LOBBY CHALLENGE, 2s by CumberlandTHE FASHIONABLE LOVER, Com. 2s by CumberlandABROAD and at HOME, an Opera, 2s by Holman.RED CROSS KNIGHTS, 2s by Holman.TRIP to the NORE, 1s by FranklinWANDERING JEW, 1s by FranklinTHE SICILIAN ROMANCE, an Opera, by H. Siddons, 1sFATAL CURIOSITY, Tragedy, by Lillo, 1sTHE WIDOW OF MALABAR, Trag. by Miss Starke, 1s 6dCOLUMBUS, an Historical Play, by Morton, 2sBARNABY BRITTLE; or, A Wife at her Wit's End, 1sJEALOUS WIFE, a Comedy, by G. Colman, 1s 6dSHE STOOPS TO CONQUER, by Goldsmith, 2sTHE PURSE, or Benevolent Tar, a Musical Farce, by Cross, 1sALL THE WORLD's A STAGE, by Jackman, 1sBOLD STROKE FOR A HUSBAND, by Mrs. Cowley, 2sCLANDESTINE MARRIAGE, by Garrick and Colman, 1s 6dTHE SEA-SIDE STORY, by Mr. Dimond, jun. 1s 6dCHAPTER of ACCIDENTS, a Comedy, by Miss Lee, 1s 6dHONEST THEIVES, 1sLOVE'S VAGARIES, Comedy, 1sTHE HEIRESS, by Gen. Bourgoyne, 2sHEIGHO FOR A HUSBAND, 2sTHE MOUNTAINEERS, by Colman, 2sINTRIGUING CHAMBERMAID, 1sTRAVELLERS IN SWITZERLAND, by Bate Dudley, 2sTHE FUGITIVE, Comedy, 2sTHE BENEVOLENT PLANTER, 1sTHE DISTRESSED BARONET, 1sTHE SIXTY-THIRD LETTER, by W. C. Oulton, 1s 6dVariety of Editions of Shakespeare, with the greatest Collection of EARLY AND MODERN PLAYS extant.Printed by Barker and Son, Gt. Russell Str. Covent Garden.ARMINIUS; A TRAGEDY.DRAMATIS PERSONAE.GERMANS.ARMINIUS,the German Chief.INGUIOMER,another Chief.SEGIMUND,Son of Segestes.GOTHMUND,Two Officers.EGBERT,Two Officers.DUMNORIX,Three Gauls in Arminius's Army.CHELDERIC,Three Gauls in Arminius's Army.TREBANTES,Three Gauls in Arminius's Army.VELEDA,Daughter of Segestes, and Wife of Arminius.German Soldiers, Bards, Women, &c.ROMANS.CAECINA,General of the Roman Army.MARCUS,Roman Officers.VALERIUS,Roman Officers.SEGESTES,a German Chief in the service of Rome.FLAVIUS,Brother to Arminius.Officers, Soldiers, &c.SCENE on the Banks of the Visurgis, now the Weser.ARMINIUS.ACT I.SCENE I. A wild Heath; a strong Castle in View Colours flying on the Ramparts, with S. P. Q. R. in large Letters; German Tents; Officers and Soldiers on the Heath.GOTHMUND, on Guard; to him EGBERT.EGBERT.HOW long must we protract this ling'ring siege?I hate all dull delay; prompt execution,And manly vigour are the soldier's glory.GOTHMUND.Egbert, 'tis true; dispatch, and sudden onsetAre the great springs of war: but well you knowWe have in Inguiomer a gallant chief,Fam'd for his warlike genius; long distinguish'dBy his heroic ardour; ever activeIn the embattled field; still rushing on,Prompt, eager, fierce, and where the battle rages,Opposing ev'ry danger.EGBERT.In the fieldI grant you, Gothmund, his renown is great.Arminius scarce out-shines him; But, my friend,Where now that warlike spirit? Tame, inactive,We dream away the time, and let that castleHold us at bay. You know we might ere nowHave storm'd the works.GOTHMUND.Our numbers are too thin:To conquer by assault our little armyWas ill prepar'd. To spare the lives of men,Our General chose to form a close blockade,And hop'd ere this by famine to reduceA feeble garrison.EGBERT.So judg'd our Chief;For that he plann'd his measures, but we knowTh' envenom'd hate, the more than deadly feud,That, like a pent-up sire, inflames Segestes,Ere since Arminius wedded to his daughter.Veleda is a pris'ner in the castle;By force her father seiz'd her, dragg'd her with him,And there detains her, obstinately bent,Never to let her husband see her more.GOTHMUND.No, never;Distress and famine may consume them both;Content he'll perish with her.GOTHMUND.But ArminiusWill soon be here; he comes by rapid marchesWith a vast host, the German world in arms;And then, my friend, then we may storm the works:One bold assault shall end this tedious siege.SCENE II. Enter a Soldier.EGBERT.Soldier, that look impatient—SOLDIER,On my stationAt yonder eastern gate, I saw this arrowRise high in air, and soon with quick descentFall on the outside of the castle wall,Short of th' intended mark. It bore this paperBrac'd round with care.(He gives the paper.)EGBERT. (Reads.)"Segestes summon all your firmest vigour;"Inspire your garrison; let no distress"Compell you to surrender. With his legions,"Caecina is at hand to raise the siege."Pass but an hour, and he will bring relief."What traitor has done this?GOTHMUND.Perhaps the deedOf those deserters from the tribes of Gaul,Who came but yesterday with specious seemingTo join our banners.EGBERT.The whole Gallic raceConquer'd by Caesar, to their masters kneel,
And crouch in bondage. Proud of being stil'dTh' Allies of Rome, they cast a jealous eyeOn all the states where liberty is cherish'd,But chief on Germany, whose true born sonsMaintain their laws, their independent rights,Brave, unsubdued, and undebas'd by slavery.(Looks at the paper.) This may be Gallic fraud; but should the newsAuthentic prove, what then will Inguiomer—GOTHMUND.My friend, no more: Lo! where he comes this way.SCENE III. Enter INGUIOMER, with Officers and Soldiers.EGBERT.The presence of our Chief almost dispellsThe sudden gloom that overcasts us all.These sudden tidings—INGUIOMER.Speak, nor hold me thusIn wonder and suspense.EGBERT.Peruse that paper.INGUIOMER.And is it this alarms you? Let me see it.(Reads to himself.EGBERT.An arrow's flight was deftin'd to conveyThe tidings to Segestes; but this soldierSafe to my hands deliver'd it.INGUIOMER.This paperMay be the stratagem of old Segestes.
Caecina with his legions! He advancesTo raise the siege! It is SegestesThat sent his lying arrow through the air,In hopes by false intelligence to checkThe ardour of our troops, and save from ruin,From certain ruin yon devoted walls.EGBERT.Might I advise, 'twere best prepare this momentTo storm the works; a feeble garrisonWill not resift a general assault.SCENE IV. Enter another Soldier.INGUIOMER.Ha! with that air—those looks—that wild surprize—What have you seen? What heard? Speak, tell me all.SOLDIER.The Romans are at hand; with eager speedThey sweep along the vale.INGUIOMER.Deceive me not.SOLDIER.I would not do it: They are now in sight.On the high summit of yon wood-crown'd hill,That fronts the western sun, a sudden blazeOf arms, of shields, and helms, glanc'd o'er the field.I saw their banners, and their glitt'ring eaglesDisplay'd in proud array.INGUIOMER.Could you descryTheir numbers?SOLDIER.No; I could not: of their strengthNo certain estimate can yet be made.O'er the fam'd causeway, long since made by Drusus,Their troops advanc'd. I saw their cavalryForth issuing from the wood that skirts the plain.If their whole army was display'd to view,Their number is but small. On solid groundPerhaps their General may pitch his camp.INGUIOMER.What, ho! my faithful followers, ourself will viewThe number and the posture of their troops.Should they advance, a wide extended marshLies foul and deep before them. On that spot,If they advance, 'tis fix'd to give them battle.Their men and horses (a) on the slimy soilWill fall a sacrisice, and with their bloodDeluge the crimson marl.EGBERT.In stagnate poolsWe have th'advantage; there a German soldierFights in his element.INGUIOMER.While I go forth,'Tis yours, brave Egbert, to arrange your guardsAround the castle. Let the heralds summonSegestes to surrender: Should he dareStill to hold out, a general assaultShall whelm himself, his castle, and his friendsIn one prodigious ruin.[Exit, followed by soldiers; Warlike music.SCENE V. EGBERT, GOTHMUND, Soldiers, &c.EGBERT.At length he takes th' alarm; but still his valour,I fear, is rouz'd too late.GOTHMUND.Mean time, my friend,I'll walk my round, and visit ev'ry post.EGBERT.Observe both armies; let me know their motions.GOTHMUND.If ought of moment happen, you shall hear it.[Exit.SCENE VI.EGBERT.Now let the herald summon to the wallsThe proud Segestes.[A trumpet sounds three times.A SOLDIER. (From the rampart.)Why that piercing clangor?What does your signal mean?EGBERT.To call SegestesTo hear our terms of peace.SOLDIER.Lo! here at handSegestes come.SEGESTES. (From the rampart.)What now does Egbert mean?Why am I summoned to the walls?EGBERT.In pityTo all the wretched, miserable Band,Whom you with fix'd hostility detainWithin those walls imprison'd, I have call'd you,To treat in friendly parley.SEGESTES.Speak your purpose.EGBERT.Lay down your arms, and with well-tim'd submissionAtone for errors past; throw wide your gates;A general pardon will restore you allTo your lov'd friends, to life, and liberty.With open arms your country will receive you.SEGESTES.Mistaken, artful man! is this a timeTo lure us to your purpose? Lo! See there!Far as my eye can strain, I see the RomansOn yonder plain that terminates the forest;I see their eagles, their embodied legions;O'er the wide field their spears, their shields, and javelinsFlash sudden gleams of fire.EGBERT.There they must halt;And there encamp. Should they attempt to wadeThrough seas and pools, they'll meet with sure destruction.Or ere they bring relief, our scaling laddersShall stand against your walls; our men shall formTheir military shell, to sap your works,Burst down your gates with ruinous assault,And in one general havoc all your friendsWill glut the soldiers rage.SEGESTES.In vain, proud man,In vain these menaces; even now I seeThe legions form their lines. Behold! see there!The battle is begun. From yonder tow'rI can survey the fortune of the field.You have my answer.[Exit from the walls.SCENE VII.EGBERT.If the foe advancesTo try the issue of a fierce engagement,I dread his skill, and his superior judgment.There Inguiomer may fail. Impetuous furyAnd rashness oft have marr'd his noble daring.Gothmund, what news? Your looks denote your fear—Have the two armies met?SCENE VIII. To him GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.They have; at firstThe day was ours, and gallant InguiomerMow'd down the Roman ranks. The fightWas in the marshes, fierce and obstinate.But on the marshy ground the Roman horsesCould find no footing; goaded by their woundsThey made the soil more slipp'ry by their blood,And with their carcasses the troopers layAll in one purple heap.EGBERT.And what has turn'dThe fortune of the field?GOTHMUND.The foe retreatedBack to the solid plain. Elate with victoryOur men pursued them. There our enterprizeHas met a check, and ruin may insue.SCENE IX. Enter SEGESTES on the Rampart.SEGESTES.My friends, I come to warn you of your fate.Though foes in war, yet you are Germans still.Break up your camp, or sure destruction hangsOn your devoted heads. A band of RomansFrom the high waving forest, where they layLodg'd in close ambush, down the steep descentRush'd on th' astonish'd foe. I see them now!They charge, they fight, they dye their swords in blood;They bear down all, they follow, and they conquer:Germans, be warn'd by me; depart at once;Fly from the fury of a conqu'ring foe.[Exit.SCENE X. Enter a German Officer.OFFICER.Haste, Egbert; let us fly; the day is lost.The Roman arms prevail; our broken ranksIn wild confusion fly.EGBERT.And Inguiomer,Say, what of him?OFFICER.He sounded a retreat;To the Visurgis he directs his course;On t'other side Arminius is arriv'd.Sound a retreat; retire, ere yet the RomansHew down the bridge.EGBERT.This terrible disasterHas ruin'd all; the siege at length is rais'd;Withdraw, my friends; flight is our only safety.[Exit with the rest.SCENE XI. A Shout within; a triumphant March is sounded: Enter CAECINA, followed by Officers, the Eagles, and Colours, with S. P. Q. R. in large Letters.CAECINA.This day, my fellow-soldiers, this great day;Has added lustre to the Roman name.The genius, and good auspices of RomeHave led us on to conquest; by your valourNot the foe only, but the rugged natureOf this wild savage country has been conquer'd.The castle is reliev'd; now let our friendsThrow wide their gates, and here with grateful heartsHail their deliverers.[The folding Gates are thrown open; the Soldiers march forward, and after them SEGESTES.]CAECINA.Segestes, you are welcome; welcome to your friends,To life, and liberty.SEGESTES.If ardent zealBy me exerted in the cause of Rome,Claims your regard, I have not toil'd in vain.CAECINA.Your zeal is known and felt: Germanicus,Wife, just, and equitable, and still intentOn all th' events of war, no sooner learn'dThat by (b) Arminius you were here pent up,Than by his orders with a chosen band,O'er a long track of moors, and fens, and forestsI march'd to your relief.SEGESTES.The virtues of your chiefI honour, and esteem: He has my thanks.CAECINA.Of his regard you will have further proof.For worth like yours new honours are intended.SEGESTES.I want no honours: While I thus address you,You see a man, who knows nor guilt nor fear.The Deified Augustus (c) in the classOf Roman citizens enroll'd my name.Proud of that title, I have since remain'dFaithful to Rome, and yet my country's friend,The friend of Germany. My voice was ever,For peace with Rome, for harmony, and friendshipBetween both nations.CAECINA.Had your voice been heard—SEGESTES.I had no influence; that flaming brand,That torch of discord, that ambitious chief,Arminius, wing'd with the vaunt lightning's speed,In ev'ry region call'd aloud to arms;To arms against Segestes, and his friends;To arms against the Romans: Ev'n now,He rushes forward, like the lion rouz'd,Lashing his sides, and goaded on to fury.'Tis said, he brings all Germany in arms.CAECINA.To blast his frantic hopes, GermanicusBy rapid marches from the distant RhineComes with his vet'ran troops. Are all your friendsReleas'd from yonder castle?SEGESTES.They went forthAt th' Eastern gate.CAECINA.Did Segimund, your son,Endure the hardships of the siege?SEGESTES.With grief,And burning blushes I recall his name.He has revolted (d); three whole years have pass'dSince last these eyes beheld him. He, I fear,Has join'd Arminius. Lo! our train of womenComes forth in slow procession.SCENE XII. A Number of Women from the Castle, and after them VELEDA, in pensive Silence; her Hands strained to her Bosom, and her Eyes fixed on her Womb (e).SEGESTES.Lo! Veleda!You there behold my daughter.CAECINA.There I seeIn that fair form, in that majestic mien,Each blooming grace, and dignity of mind.SEGESTES.She was my only joy, my best delight,My lov'd Veleda, till with treach'rous artsArminius stole her from her father's arms.CAECINA.Afflicted fair! why does that cloud of sorrowObscure those eyes, and bend you to the earth,Like some fair flower beneath the beating rainThat droops its languid head! Dispell your grief,And let those eyes no more be dimn'd with tears.VELEDA.Tears have forgot to flow; their source is dry.Despair is now the portion of a wretch,Whom you have robb'd of all her soul holds dear.CAECINA.Why charge my conduct?VELEDA.Wedded to Arminius,Why am I sever'd from him?CAECINA.That, you know,Was by your father's order.VELEDA.Even nowI bear the fruit of our connubial loves.And must my infant, must my blameless childBe born in slavery?CAECINA.GermanicusWill soon be here: The virtues of the Prince,His tender sympathy, his social loveWill soften all your cares, and give you comfort.VELEDA.Think you a heart like mine, a German heart,That without liberty deems life a burthen,Think you a mind so form'd will bear to liveA day, an hour in execrable bondage?Is that the comfort Rome affords the wretched?CAECINA.Ungen'rous thought! for you a safe retreatShall be assign'd in the delightful climeOf Italy, where grief and busy careNo more shall cloud the sunshine of your days.VELEDA.And can the charms of luxury and vice,Can warmer suns, and soft Italian seasonsLull to repose a mind upon the rack?Infuse a base oblivion of my friends,And my lost husband? In our boisterous climeFair liberty can soften all our cares.'Midst forests, rocks, and fens, and hills of ice,It is our sun: It gilds the horizon round.CAECINA. [To SEGESTES.I see the spirit of ArminiusNot of her father, kindles in her breast,And thus inflames a weak deluded mind.Veleda, hear me.VELEDA.Must I hence be dragg'dA wretched captive, with my babe unborn,Far from my native land? And do you RomansUnsheathe your swords to triumph o'er a woman?Do you wage war with infants in the womb?CAECINA.Speak your request.VELEDA.Restore me to my husband.CAECINA.Segestes, Speak your will.SEGESTES.'Tis yours to judge;Yours to decide, which has the strongest claimHer husband, or her father. She is the wifeOf fierce Arminius, (f) and she sprung from me.CAECINA.Since sprung from you, she merits gentle treatment:Arminius will be struck with Roman virtue.Veleda, you are free; a chosen bandIn safety shall conduct you to your friends.[Exit with Officers, &c.SCENE XIII. SEGESTES, VELEDA.SEGESTES.Alas! my daughter, can you leave me thus?VELEDA.And will you linger in this hostile camp?SEGESTES.The duty that a daughter owes her parent—VELEDA.Our country is our parent: 'tis to herOur love, our duty, all our faculties,Our wealth, our pow'r, our very lives are due.She is the common mother of us all.To you she calls; to you she lifts her hands;She tears her hair; implores you not to plungeA Roman Javelin in her matron breast.Enter an Officer.OFFICER.A chosen band is ready to conduct youTo the Visurgis' banks.VELEDA.Alas! my father,Here must I leave you?SEGESTES.Go, farewell, my child.VELEDA.Yet, ere we part, should the embattled armiesMeet in fierce conflict, let my warning voiceWithhold you from the field; whether you fall,Or conquer, friends in a fierce civil war
Die by the hands of friends; remember still,'Tis kindred blood that stains the crimson plain.SEGESTES.Farewell, my child.VELEDA. [Looking after him.Farewell; perhaps for ever.May all the Gods of Germany direct him.[Exit.End of the First ActACT II.SCENE .I. An open Plain, with the German Camp at the further end; German Soldiers in different Groupes.EGBERT, GOTHMUND.EGBERT.GOTHMUND, this hurry, this tumultuous uproarIs big with doubt, and fear, and wild distraction.GOTHMUND.The harbinger perhaps of victory.EGBERT.Would it were true: This soldier may inform us.Enter a Soldier.SOLDIER.Far as my eye could stretch, I saw our men,From yonder western bank, march o'er the bridge.GOTHMUND.Perhaps some canton sends auxiliary forceTo join Arminius's army.Enter SEGIMUND.EGBERT.Segimund!What have you seen? What tidings do you bring us?SEGIMUND.From yon steep hill, imbrown'd with waving woods,I saw the Roman eagles; saw their legionsOn the embattled plain; I saw them rushWith force resistless on the broken ranksOf our inferior numbers. Flush'd with victoryThey hung upon our rear, till the VisergisCheck'd their career of slaughter. Lo! this wayThe valiant Inguiomer.SCENE II. Enter INGUIOMER, followed by Officers and Soldiers.INGUIOMER.Ye Gods of Germany, forgive your soldier,If overpow'r'd by number I retreated,To save my gallant warriors from the sword.What man could dare, I ventur'd. Witness for meThis blunted sabre, and this shiver'd javelin,And this my shield with honourable marksPierc'd and indented.SEGIMUND.In your country's causeYour zeal and ardour have been long the themeOf gen'ral praise.INGUIOMER.Yet to be thus compell'dTo raise the siege, afflicts and goads my heart.It withers all my laurels.SEGIMUND.Does my fatherFollow the Roman banners?INGUIOMER.Yes; SegestesIs fix'd in guilt. Ere this, brave Segimund,The castle has surrender'd to the Romans.SEGIMUND.And is Veleda, is my sister leftTo pine in bondage? Must Arminius's wifeBe led in sad captivity to Rome?INGUIOMER.Too sure she must: her father wills it so.SEGIMUND.This vile indignity with ten-fold rageWill fire our gallant chief; will kindle furyIn ev'ry German breast, and send the javelinLaunch'd with redoubled vigour to its mark.INGUIOMER.Thou brave young man, had your heroic virtueInspir'd Segestes, he had now been happy,Lov'd by Arminius, honour'd by his country;But now the tainted rebel brands his name.SEGIMUND.He seiz'd me in his arms, and from my friendsBore me unconscious, yet of tender years,To join the Romans. (a) At the Ubian altarAdminister'd an oath; an impious oath,To lift me in his league against my country.Three years have pass'd, fine last these eyes behold him.I scarce should know him now. As soon as reasonDawn'd on my soul, I saw the horrid guiltOf waging war against my native land.I fled through forests drear; I lurk'd in caves,
And roam'd from place to place, from state to state,Till late I join'd the standard of Arminius.INGUIOMER.Yonder I see him; Lo! he comes this way.SCENE III. Enter ARMINIUS, Officers and Soldiers.ARMINIUS.My fellow-warriors, my brave gallant friends,Ye gen'rous sons of freedom, you are welcomeTo the Visurgi's banks. ArminiusWith open arms receives you. Though repuls'dBy the superior numbers of the foe,You have dar'd nobly.—Inguiomer, thou brave,Heroic chief, th' invader will not longEnjoy his victory. I come in forceTo check his pride; from all the German states,Far as the Danube to the Northern ocean,I bring embodied nations to the field.INGUIOMER.I form'd a close blockade; but still Segestes,The base, the willing slave of his new masters,Scorn'd to capitulate. Meantime CaecinaAdvanc'd against me with superior numbers.My little army call'd aloud to battle.I led them on.ARMINIUS.I know it, Inguiomer;I know each circumstance; you've acted bravely.And has Segestes with his garrisonMarch'd forth to swear fidelity to Rome?INGUIOMER.So says the voice of fame.SEGIMUND.And there my sister,My lov'd Veleda, she must there remainIn sad captivity?ARMINIUS.Thou generous youth,Thou worthy son of an ignoble father,Much I esteem your ardour; much I honourYour early virtue. But, your keen reflectionPlants daggers in my heart. Arminius's wifeLed in captivity! Distracting thought!Come, dire revenge! inspire me with the rageOf the stern God of War, that I may pourDestruction of th' Italian spoiler's head,And whelm his legions in one mangled heap,A sacrifice to vengeance.INGUIOMER.You have rouzedAll that is man within me, for that sceneOf glorious havoc, for that just revengeMy bosom pants. Come, lead me to the onset.I burn to follow through the thickest ranks,And there to vie with your heroic deeds.ARMINIUS.Inguiomer, we oft have fought together,And seen each other's volour. In my tentA council shall be held. We there will planThe time, and order of our grand assault.Caecina is deliver'd by the gods,He and his army, to the slaught'ring sword.This moment, Segimund, do you go forth,And issue orders, that our scouts may range
The country round, and with due care exploreThe motions of the enemy; their works,And station of their camp.SEGIMUND.Forthwith your orders,Shall be obeyed.[Exit SEGIMUND.INGUIOMER.A warlike soul like thineThinks nothing done, while aught is unperform'd.One glorious onset will consummate all,And that, I see, is lab'ring in your breast.The time for fiery expedition calls,One blow decides the war. By cold delayWe hazard all; for should Germanicus—ARMINIUS.Does he alarm you?INGUIOMER.In the adverse campHe is expected with his vet'ran legions.So say the pris'ners, whom our troops have ledO'er the Visurgis: it is sure intelligence.ARMINIUS.Have you not heard the great, the glorious tidings,Germanicus, in a career of victory,Far as th' Amisia's banks Now the Ems, near Embden. had led his legions.He there made halt; he paus'd, and saw the dangerOf tracing back his steps far as the Rhine,Midst hostile nations, all in ambush waitingTo hang upon his rear. The coward fledFor shelter to his ships; he spread his sails,And trusted to the waves. The Northern ocean,
Vast in circumference, tempestous, deepGave him no refuge. Soon a storm arose,And heav'd the mountain billows to the sky.His fleet was scatter'd; (b) some in distant islesWere dash'd on pointed rocks; by whirlwinds driv'n;The rest have perish'd in the brawling surge.INGUIOMER.So perish all, who dare invade our country.ARMINIUS.Where now Germanicus?—Upon some rockPerhaps he rolls his eyes around the wat'ry main,And there surveys the wreck of all his hopes;His boasted eagles in the roaring deepAll sunk, and swallow'd up. No aid from himCaecina can expect. In yonder campWe hold another (c) Varus and his legions.SCENE IV. Enter SEGIMUND.ARMINIUS.Why, Segimund, that eager haste?—What meansThat sudden clangor?[A trumpet is heard at a distance.SEGIMUND.As I took my stationFar as the verge of yonder level plain,My straining eye perceiv'd a well-oar'd galley,Cross the Visurgis: From the highest mastThe olive branch, the harbinger of peace,Was manifest to view.ARMINIUS.The olive branch!This, Inguiomer, is Roman policy:In their distress they are the friends of peace.INGUIOMER.Lo! they are near at hand: might I advise,Admit them to a calm, a patient hearing.SCENE V. Enter MARCUS, with Roman Soldiers and Standards.MARCUS.To thee, Arminius, our brave Roman chiefSends me with terms of kind and friendly import.To thee too, Inguiomer, he proffers friendship.Oft have I seen you in the ranks of warEnacting prodigies of valour.ARMINIUS.Say,Unfold your purpose. Why approach our camp?MARCUS.Caecina means to prove the moderationThat sways his councils, and by me he sendsA present, that he knows will glad your heart.He sends your wife: Lo! where Veleda comes.Enter VELEDA.MARCUS.Once more she's yours: (Takes her hand)—I thus resign her to you.ARMINIUS.Can this be possible? Surprize and wonderO'erpow'r each faculty:—Once more Veleda,Thus do I see you?—What no God could promise,We are allow'd to meet again in life.I shall go wild with joy: And do I see youOnce more restor'd to these fond circling arms?VELEDA.My brave, my honour'd husband! Once again,Free'd from captivity, releas'd from bondage,A German wife, whose (d) hymeneal godsForm all her bliss, her only joy on earth,Revisits her lost husband; in his armsEnjoys her sacred rights—this rapture swellsAbove all bounds, and thus in tears of joyWill force its way.[Embracing him.ARMINIUS.Thou dear, thou tender pledgeOf constancy and love! To fold thee thus,Is joy and victory. Not ev'n the day,That saw me triumph o'er three slaughter'd legions,And Germany reliev'd from proud oppression;When not a Roman Eagle hover'd o'er us,And with one loud acclaim consenting nations,Hail'd me, "the brave deliverer of Germany;"Not ev'n that day with such sincere delightInspir'd my soul, as that which now transports me,When! Gracious Gods! When thus I call you mine.[Embracing her.And did your father, did that haughty rebelResign you to me?VELEDA.No; it was his wishWith pride, and fix'd hoftility to you,To hold me still in bondage; but CaecinaWith mild humanity releas'd me to you.My brother here! Here in Arminius' camp,[Seeing Segimund.The soldier of his country!SEGIMUND.Oh! My sister,Your great example in my country's causeInspires my soul with more than common ardour.VELEDA.Thou brave, thou gen'rous youth![They embrace.MARCUS.Caecina scorns to wage a war with women.Though adverse in the field, he still regardsA husband's rights, and sends you back your wife.ARMINIUS.To own an obligation to a Roman,To me is thraldom: Yet he has my thanks.MARCUS.Caecina means to give you stronger proof,That moderation governs all his actions.If you will listen to his just proposals,By his ambassador he means to offerFair terms of peace.VELEDA.I had forgot: Your brother,Who came the leader of a Raman cohort,To see me safe deliver'd to your arms,Explain'd the Roman General's design.ARMINIUS.Where is my brother now?MARCUS.Close to yon bankHe halted with his men.ARMINIUS.Inform your General,When hostages in form have been exchang'd,
By his ambassador he then may sendHis overtures of peace.MARCUS.I shall reportYour answer to Caecina.ARMINIUS.Will you graceYour Roman name by one more liberal act?MARCUS.Speak your request.ARMINIUS.My brother's near at hand;You Romans call him Flavius: Will you grantOne friendly interview? Though leagu'd with Rome,He is my brother still.MARCUS.Withdraw your guards;To Inguiomer deliver up your sabre,That no rude outrage may disturb your meeting.ARMINIUS.I promise it— (gives up his sabre)—you have my plighted faith.MARCUS.Together you may hold a friendly parley:He shall attend you here.ARMINIUS.You have my thanks;Farewell, Veleda; Segimund conduct herTo my pavillion. You my friends retire.[They go out.SCENE VI.ARMINIUS alone.Since he revolted to the Roman banners,Four times the sun hath made his annual round,And in that time these eyes have not beheld him.Inspire me, Gods, with mild persuasive speech,With words of pow'r, to wake each tender feeling,And melt into his heart. But lo! he comes.SCENE VII. ARMINIUS, FLAVIUS, (e).ARMINIUS.I wish'd to see a brother: By that nameCan I address you, while that Roman garbDeclares hostility, and speaks the manWho has renounc'd his friends, abjur'd his country,And bears a heart, that to the pulse of natureAnswers no more?FLAVIUS.Accuse me not unjustly:I meet Arminius with a brother's love.ARMINIUS.Say you behold me, with the pious loveYou owe your country, and with joy, with raptureArminius springs to clasp you in his arms.FLAVIUS.Though I come hither from the adverse camp,And follow Caesar's standard; yet my country,The welfare of all Germany, the peace,And happiness of millions, strongly pleadHere in this bosom; those the pow'rful motivesThat urge me to the war.ARMINIUS.And by that war,Is slavery the boon you mean to grantTo your devoted country? For those bright,Those noble motives, does that burnish'd helmDisplay its lustre?FLAVIUS.This high plumed helmet(taking it off)Germanicus with his own warlike handPlac'd on my brow.ARMINIUS.And that unseemly scar,That marks your forehead, and deforms your visage,What gen'rous hand bestow'd it?FLAVIUS.On the banksOf the Adrana Now the Eder, in the Landgravate of Hesse., where the Cattian nation,After a battle obstinately fought,Gave way at length to the undaunted valourOf veteran troops, I saw a Roman press'dBy a fierce German with his lifted sabre,When instantly I flew to his relief,And then receiv'd this honourable wound,But sav'd a Roman citizen from death.ARMINIUS.For that exploit, that great heroic deed,What was your recompence?FLAVIUS.A civic crown (f),A military chain, and other honours,That grace the Roman's valour.ARMINIUS.Did those honoursGlare in your eye, and lure you from your country?FLAVIUS.They are my noblest pride.ARMINIUS.(With a sneering laugh)—You have the wagesOf a slave cheaply bought (g).FLAVIUS.Controul this violence;I have not merited this keen reproach.ARMINIUS.And do those baubles pay you for your treason?Contempt and laughter mix with indignation.Thou base deserter!FLAVIUS.Brother, if you knewThe Roman character—ARMINIUS.Full well I know it.The nations of the world too long have groan'dBeneath their iron rod: And shall your Caesars,Your Caesars deified, and for their crimesEnroll'd among the Gods of Rome, shall they,Who trample on their Senate, and their people,Demand the homage of a free-born race,And bid the Northern world embrace the yoke?FLAVIUS.Germanicus is lov'd where'er he's known.He leads the armies of Imperial RomeTo fame and victory. Where now the spiritOf the TUBANTES, and the CATTIAN state?
They have submitted, and the Roman chiefEnsures his conquest by the arts of peace.He wins all hearts; he calls the wand'ring savageFrom fens, from forests, and from hills of snowTo settled mansions; teaches them to formNew laws, new cities; to enjoy the sweetsOf civil union, and of polish'd life.ARMINIUS.Their arts of polish'd life are Roman vices,The baits of luxury; the balefull charm,That mingles in the cup delicious poisonTo sweeten slavery.FLAVIUS.No more I'll bearThis torrent of abuse.ARMINIUS.With patience hear me:I now descend to humble supplications.I now conjure you by the sacred tiesOf honour; by the love (h) you owe your country,Atone for what is past; renounce your treason.By me your mother prays, implores, beseeches you,Not to betray your family and friends.Think of the vast renown of leading armiesTo serve your country: To that glorious conductWill you prefer the vile detested nameOf a deserter, a perfidious traitor?FLAVIUS.Here break we off; here end this impious strainAgainst the lords, and sov'reigns of the world;The friends of human kind. Opposing them,'Tis you betray the interests of humanity.
Hither I came disarm'd, or my good falchionShould vindicate the cause of Roman virtue.ARMINIUS.Presumptuous man! I dare thee to the field.What ho! bring forth my arms.Enter MARCUS.MARCUS.Controul this rage;On terms of peace this interview was granted,Flavius withdraw; you're wanted at your post.FLAVIUS.Farewell, Arminius; may we never meetIn the embattled field.[Exit with Marcus.ARMINIUS.Thou traitor, go,And 'midst the armed files avoid my sword.And yet, —must brothers meet in adverse arms?In kindred blood must they imbrue their javelins?'Tis ever thus, when discontent and factionBrood over fancied ills, and fire with rageSons against fathers, brothers against brothers.'Tis horror all, and worse than civil war.End of the Second Act.ACT III.SCENE I. The German Camp.VELEDA, SEGIMUND.VELEDA.OH! Segimund, to see you thus my brother,Arm'd in your country's cause; to see you here,Here in Arminius's camp, once more restor'dTo your best friends, your country, and your gods,Expands my tow'ring soul above all bounds.My joy wants words: 'tis speechless ecstacy.SEGIMUND.Thanks to the gods, who lent a ray of truthTo light and guide me to the paths of honour.I saw my father's guilt; I saw him join'dIn a flagitious league against his country.There ceas'd a father's power; there clos'd for everAll his authority: in vice and treasonI ow'd him no obedience.VELEDA.Your first dutyYou owe your country; and you now discharge it,Dear to your friends, ennobled by your virtue.SEGIMUND.Oh! had my father, and Arminius's brother,Glow'd with due feeling for their country's wrongs,
And in their bosoms own'd the sacred flameOf public liberty; we then togetherMight join Arminius, and together treadThe paths of war, with mutual ardour fir'd,All gen'rous rivals in the field of glory.VELEDA.Alas! vain hope: Segestes views ArminiusWith deadly hate, implacable, and fierce,Fix'd in his heart: it gangrees there like poison.With that fell fury he made me his pris'ner.SEGIMUND.And did he mean to drag you in his train,Through all the horrors of wide wasting war?VELEDA.No; I was destin'd to a distant clime,To some Italian city; there, he said,Perpetual spring, and sun-enliven'd scenesWould teach me to abhor our northern tempests;There wean me from my friends, and from the loveI bear Arminius. But, oh! not for meGay gilded scenes, and bright Italian suns;No, let me wander on the mountains' ridge;Roam through the forest; in the rapid barkPly the tough oar, and glide along the stream;Give me my humble clay-built tenement;Free from a master let me call it mine;That thought, though tempests gather o'er my head,Will warm my heart amidst eternal snows.SEGIMUND.Arminius by his care those rights will guard.Ere long he means to give a loose to war.Gods! should my father join the hostile ranks!My heart recoils with horror at the thought.VELEDA.Dispel your fears, nor thus anticipateImaginary ills.SCENE II. To them ARMINIUS.VELEDA.Arminius, welcome,Your presence sooths my soul to peace and joy.ARMINIUS.Oh! my Veleda! By your late misfortunesEndear'd, and now more welcome to my arms!It joys me much to find you thus engag'dIn parley with your brother: Segimund,Observe her well; her councils will direct,And guide your steps: she differs from her father.SEGIMUND.She breathes the energy of truth and virtue.Your camp to me is the true school of honour.ARMINIUS.Heroic youth! with an observant eyeI've mark'd your zeal for liberty; your promptUndaunted valour, and your love of glory.The noblest gift a German chief can give,Shall grace your merit. Go to my pavillion,And by my orders you will there receiveA warlike horse, (a) with a victorious lanceDeep ting'd with Roman blood.SEGIMUND.This gen'rous proofOf your esteem, shall with the love of fameInspire my soul, and kindle all its fires.ARMINIUS.A grand exploit, a vast, a glorious enterprizeWill soon take place: To you shall be assign'dA post of honour. Inguiomer has help'dTo plan our measures; he will tell you all.[Exit SEGIMUND.SCENE III.ARMINIUS, VELEDA.VELEDA.With pride I see a brother's early virtue.ARMINIUS.Your gen'rous spirit animates his frame,One soul informs you both.—Veleda, tell meDo you bring with you to your husband's armsUnblemish'd honour? Do you now returnPure, and immaculate, unstain'd, unviolatedBy the proud spoiler, the Italian robber?VELEDA.No ruffian dar'd with brutal violenceAssault my virtue: torn from your embraceLife had no charms, and death had lost his terror.That was my safe guard: she who dares to die,Protects herself; the guardian of her honour.ARMINIUS.Thou best of women! in the hour of peaceMy joy, my comfort; in the embattled field,The brave inspirer of all martial deeds!To hear thy voice; to have thee in the rearThe witness of my conduct, (b) the applauder
Of ev'ry gallant action, gives an edgeTo my keen falchion, nerves my lifced arm,And gives fresh ardour in my country's cause.VELEDA.Our nuptial rites instructed me in allThe rigid duties of a German wife.The sword, the shield, the spear, and other gifts.Were the firm bonds (c) of our connubial union,Our hymenial gods. From them I learn'd,It was my contract, my religious vowTo be your partner in all toil and danger,To share your pains, and dare with you in war.ARMINIUS.You have dar'd nobly with me: in the shockOf the embattled lines, one thought of theeWing'd with the light'ning's speed has sent me forwardInto the thickest danger. From the fieldYour care receiv'd me, rouz'd my drooping strength,Reviv'd my spirit, as you counted o'erEach honourable scar, and dress'd my wounds.VELEDA.Then, in those moments to embrace my soldier,To count with praise his honourable wounds;Apply the healing balm of plants and flow'rs,And aromatic shrubs, was the delight,The tender office of a faithful wife,Who saw her hero in his country's causeDefying danger, prodigal of blood,The great deliverer of Germany.ARMINIUS.Grant me that triumph, ye benignant gods,Crown me with that renown; I then shall say,I've liv'd enough, (d) for nature and for glory.VELEDA.Glory like yours no injuries of timeWill e'er extinguish; in immortal bloomYour dear-bought laurels will for ever flourish.Your zeal for liberty shall be the themeOf the whole northern world. To fame like yoursThe bards of Germany (e) shall tune their harps,And in immortal strains send down your nameTo future times, and with their pious hymns,Their sacred minstrelsy, by your exampleInflame posterity to brave exploit.SCENE IV. To them INGUIOMER.ARMINIUS.What tidings, Inguiomer?INGUIOMER.I've seen the posts,The camp, the works, and numbers of the foe.Where the Visurgis pours a shallower stream,Join'd by a chosen band I forded over,And watch'd the motions of CAECINA's army.On a long narrow neck of solid ground,With fens and marshes round him, close pent up,Upon an isthmus in the wat'ry waste,Their legions are inclos'd. I saw their soldiersAll busy at the works: entrenchments, ramparts,And mounds of turf thrown up with sudden hasteAre now their only hopeARMINIUS.Caecina thereIs insulated; there imprison'd closeBy fens and marshes. By my special order
A chosen band already stand prepar'dTo issue forth, and gain by diff'rent roadsThe summit of yon hills; there to unsluiceAll the whole store of long collected waters,And deluge all the vale.INGUIOMER.The Romans thenMay look aghast, and shudder at their fate.ARMINIUS.The sun declining slopes his western wheels,And deep'ning into gloom the lazy cloudsPromise a night to veil the face of things.The troops design'd to circle round the hills,And lie in ambush there; are they drawn up,And ready for their enterprize?INGUIOMER.They are, all eager for the march: yet ere they start,They wish to hear your animating voice,And from yourself receive their final orders.ARMINIUS.My gallant friends shall hear me; Inguiomer,I go with joy to see their warlike spirit.I leave you now, Veleda: at the dawn,A glorious scene of havoc and revenge,A noble spectacle shall glad your eyes.Trust to my care; you still shall live in freedom.[Exit.SCENE V. VELEDA, INGUIOMER.VELEDA. [Looking after him.By you defended, by your gen'rous effortsProtected, guarded, Germany is safe
From the oppressor's rod. In him we seeThe godlike spirit of those ancient worthiesWho toil'd, or bled for liberty and laws.INGUIOMER.Years have elaps'd, since by his patriot ardourExpell'd, exterminated the Romans fledBeyond the Rhine. Their boasted Emperor,Their deified Augustus, dar'd no moreInvade the land: his schemes of wild ambitionBy one great overthrow he saw defeated,He pass'd his days in misery of heart;Wept for his loss, and like a puny infantCried, "Varus, Varus, (f) give me back my legions."VELEDA.Oh! may Tiberius, who usurps the nameOf Caesar, may that fell, that savage tyrant,That monster of iniquity and fraud,Before the dawn relumes the purpled East,Oh! may Arminius give him ample causeTo mourn his slaughter'd legions; may he shedThe tear of bitt'rest anguish, on the rackOf a mind torn and goaded by his crimes.INGUIOMER.This very night we storm the Roman camp.Our plan is form'd; our measures are concerted;Your brother will lead on a chosen band,A brave battalion: There the gen'rous youthMay by his deeds immortalize his name.VELEDA.I doubt him not: Within his bosom glowsThe hero, and the patriot. Since the GodsRestor'd me to my friends, this very dayI saw my brother busy at his post;
I paus'd, and listen'd to him; then I heardThe language of his heart: A train of bardsWith fervent zeal in flow procession came,Chaunting their heav'nly strains. "My brother cried,"Come, see me fighting in my country's cause."If victory attends me (g), to your annals"Add a young warrior; if I fall in battle,"Record my memory."INGUIOMER.He gives an earnestOf matchless worth, the rival of Arminius.SCENE VI. To them GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.A barge, with streamers waving to the wind,Has cross'd the river, and ev'n now she liesCloss anchor'd near the shore. The Roman chiefSends his ambassador.INGUIOMER.And have you seenArminius?GOTHMUND.With some chosen officersHe holds a Council in his tent; and thereI could not tresspass on his privacy.VELEDA.Be mine that task; from me he will not deem itIll-judg'd intrusion; I will seek him straight.[Exit.GOTHMUND.Ere this the Deputy has reach'd our camp.Think you he brings such equitable terms,
As may conciliate peace between the nations,And close the scene of carnage and destruction?INGUIOMER.'Tis fit he should have audience: But in vain,I fear, he comes: Our frantic foes,Enur'd to war, with mad ambition fir'd,And flush'd with hope of universal empire,Will ne'er agree to give the world a peace,On the broad base of justice, and the lawsThat bind consenting nations.SCENE VII. The back Scene draws: In the middle a Throne raised with Turf: A warlike March: Soldiers walk forward, and line the Stage on both sides: ARMINIUS following, and takes his Seat.ARMINIUS.At length the Roman general sees the streights,To which his scanty numbers are reduc'd.Destruction hovers o'er him; in despair,Which he calls lenity, and Roman virtue,By his ambassador he offers terms.But what ambassador?—That hoary traitor,Segestes is his delegate: By himHe hopes to grace his cause; that vile deserter,That foe to liberty, that friend of Rome,Brings his insidious overtures: He comesTo varnish o'er the slavery he loves.Conduct him hither; let the traitor enter.SCENE VIII. Enter Soldiers bearing Ensigns and Eagles, and after them SEGESTES.ARMINIUS.Ere now, Segestes, we have often metOn better terms; together we have soughtTh' embattled foe, our hearts with equal ardourPanting for glory, and our pointed javelinsThirsting for hostile blood. But now that bondOf gen'rous union is dissolv'd for ever.SEGESTES.Judge not too rashly: Still this bosom glowsWith social love; still feels the sympathyOf kind affections; anger and resentmentFor my lost daughter now subside in peace.Foes in the field, in private we are friends.ARMINIUS.Friendship is founded on the noblest basis;On generous sentiment, and public virtue;On truth, on honour, and congenial minds.Treason and honour never can embrace.Now, speak your embassy: I long to hearThe orator of Rome.SEGESTES.My embassyAims at the peace of Germany and Rome.Wide wasting war too long has made the landA scene of desolation. Helpless widows,Afflicted virgins, and unhappy orphansAre bath'd in tears. Your fields are cover'd o'erWith the unburied limbs of slaughter'd soldiers,Romans and Germans; all your sacred groves
Are levell'd in the dust, and all your riversSurcharg'd with blood run purple to the sea.ARMINIUS.But whence those horrors? Say, with truth declare,Who were the authors of that wild destruction?SEGESTES.To trace our mutual errors to their source,And on the Roman, or Cheruscan nameTo fix the cause, is not within my province.I come the harbinger of peace; I come,To state the message of the Roman chief.It is his wish by justice, and by mercy,Not by the sword, to win consenting hearts,To call the wand'ring German to the artsOf polish'd manners, and of social life.'Tis on this basis he would raise his trophies,His truest glory.ARMINIUS.Still I'm lost in darkness:Wherefore this torrent of superslous speech?If your new masters call it eloquence,And Roman oratory, still to us'Tis the mere pomp of words, and vain paraderYou come to offer peace; declare your terms.SEGESTES.Thus then Caecina by my voice informs you.Let the Visurgis be the western boundaryOf the Cheruscan state: From thence the country,Far as the Albis Now the ELBE., whose impetuous course
Empties its current in the Northern sea,Shall be your vast domain.ARMINIUS.Yet tell me more:Th' extensive region from the Western bank—SEGESTES.Far as the Rhine the nations shall submitTo the mild sway, the wisdom, and the laws,By which the glory of Imperial RomeMeans to reform, and humanize the world.ARMINIUS. [Rising.Is this the boasted justice of your masters?And is it thus they humanize the world?SEGESTES.Where'er they penetrate, fair order dawns.ARMINIUS.Where'er they penetrate, oppression follows.SEGESTES.The whole Cheruscan state is granted to you.You wage no war for conquest.ARMINIUS.The CheruscansWish for no conquest; conquest is the aimOf murd'rer's flush'd with insolence and pride.The fell ambition of the haughty RomansGave us, in evil hour! Between the RhineAnd the Visurgis to behold their eagles,Their lictors, tribunes (h,) and their vile collectors,Exactions, tributes, cruelty and lust;Rapine and murder!—These are their exploits;A band of robbers!—Are the nations rich?
Happy and thriving (i)? Roman avariceBecomes their foe. Do they endure distress,And pine in want? Roman ambition stillAims at new victory: To them alikeThe wealth and poverty of nations; allMust fall before your sov'reigns of the world.To rob and ravage is their art of war,And when they've made a solitude around them,They call it peace.SEGESTES.Their offer now importsA firm, a lasting peace: Within your limitsLive safe, and uninvaded: Rome is willingOn terms to grant a vast extensive region.ARMINIUS. [Rising.Think you I mean to merchandize (k) the war?To barter part of Germany? By sale,And vile exchange, to traffic for our own?Go tell your General my last resolve,[Coming forward.Let him give back my country; let him giveTo free-born men their unmolested rights,Their plan of laws, their temples, and their gods.From the Visurgis let him call his legions;Repass the Rhine, and on the side of GaulEnjoy the bank, which your divine AugustusVainly call'd Germany; there let him dwellIn sullen majesty, and let his EaglesNo more, like Vultures, hover o'er our heads.Let him do this, Arminius grants him peace.SEGESTES.This haughty answer with redoubled furyWill light the flame of war, and once againWide wasting slaughter shall stalk o'er the land.ARMINIUS.Go and inform Caecina, tell your Gen'ralTill I have chas'd his robbers and freebootersBack to the Rhine, my sword shall ne'er be sheath'd.And if the Romans will not leave a space,A scanty space, where I can live in freedom,Arminius for himself will find (l) a spot,Where he can die with honour.SEGESTES.Must I bearThis answer to Caecina?ARMINIUS.End we hereThis war of words: All parley now is clos'd.Conduct the traitor to his Roman friends.[Exit SEGESTES, with his Train.INGUIOMER.We thank you, brave Arminius, for this zeal,This gen'rous ardour for our sacred rights.ARMINIUS.'Tis yours, my friends, 'tis yours this very nightTo prove, by valour, that the Gods reserve usTo be asserters of the public weal,And ere the dawn, by one collected blowTo wreak our vengeance on the Roman race.End of the Third Act.ACT IV.SCENE I. The German Camp still continues.ARMINIUS, INGUIOMER,ARMINIUS.THAT treach'rous slave, the Ambassador of RomeHas had his answer.INGUIOMER.When Caecina hearsThe energy of truth, the firm decisionThat liberty inspir'd, his heart will shrink,And shudder at the ruin that surrounds him.ARMINIUS.The blow must soon be struck; the hour draws nigh;Time presses; we are call'd; his parting rayThe sun has spent, and in suffusion redHis glaring orb is quench'd; clouds roll on clouds,And night hangs low'ring on the drowsy world,Propitious to our purpose.INGUIOMER.All things favourOur grand assault. On yonder eastern bank,O'er the Visurgis where our bridge was join'dTo the main land, the head has been destroy'dBy Roman caution; but our boats and platformsWell chain'd together will secure our march.ARMINIUS.By Heav'n, this night Caecina and his legionsShall share the sate of Varus; once againWe shall exterminate the Roman race.Some strong emotion, some prophetic ardourExpands my breast, and o'er informs my soul.I feel the god; imagination burns,And colours to my sight a glorious scene,A scene of victory! I see their campFloating in gore; their tow'rs and ramparts storm'd;Their mangled bodies in one purple heapCov'ring the plain, to feed the region kites.SCENE II. Enter SEGIMUND.ARMINIUS.Segimund, you come in time: where are your friends,Gothmund and Egbert?SEGIMUND.Both with hasty step,Pursue me hither.ARMINIUS.Have you seen my ordersDuly obey'd?SEGIMUND.I have; the men collectedWait in their tents, impatient for the signalTo issue forth, and on the open plainForm their battalions.SCENE III. Enter GOTHMUND and EGBERT.ARMINIUS.Gothmund, you are welcome;And you brave Egbert. Inguiomer, you seeThe warlike chiefs, who by my choice are destin'dTo burst the barriers of the Roman camp,And let wild uproar loose.INGUIOMER.Confide in them;Their valour in the field has oft been prov'd.ARMINIUS.Thus then, my friends: you, Segimund, must leadA brave, a chosen, well compacted band,To storm the eastern gate. Against the foeUse his own arts. The military shallForm with your bucklers: under that advanceTo sap their walls, and to hew down their gates.Those barriers levell'd, rush undaunted forward;Enter their camp, lead on your valiant troops,And plant your swords in ev'ry breast you meet.SEGIMUND.This night shall prove me worthy of your choice.ARMINIUS.Egbert, 'tis yours to head a strong reserve,And follow in the rear; support the ranks,And heap new terror on the astonish'd foe.You, Gothmund, must assault the western gate.A brave, a warlike, a well chosen numberOf fierce battalions will obey your signals.INGUIOMER.There at the head of well embodied squadronsI plant my standard, to watch all events,
All turns and all vicissitudes of war;And if the foe alarm'd should sally forth,He'll rush on sure destruction.ARMINIUS.At the headOf my division I shall circle roundTo the wide open vale, and in the woodsThat skirt the borders, find a station fitFor my battalions; there in ambush waitTo intercept Caecina in his flight,And give his legions to the slaughtering sword.SEGIMUND.Our duty calls; we'll seek our sev'ral posts,And form our lines.ARMINIUS.Yet stay; another word:Remember all to move in silent order;Let not a stir, no voice, no sound be heard.Let ev'ry soldier hush his pent up valour,Till in one moment, one collected blowYou burst upon 'em: To conceal our marchA night of vapours hovers o'er our heads.While you advance, let shouts, and hideous tumult,War-songs, and howlings, sound throughout our camp,With horrid uproar; let fires blaze to heav'n,And dart a sudden lustre o'er all the field.Veleda comes; my valiant friends farewell.[Exeunt INGUIOMEP, SECIMUND, EGDERT, and GOTHMUND.SCENE IV. ARMINIUS, VELEDA,ARMINIUS.Approach Veleda; in this awful moment,Big with the fate of Germany, your presenceBrings joy and comfort. Sure some pow'r aboveWatch'd over all your ways; some guardian godFrom his religious grove sail'd through the airTo shelter innocence, and give you backTo a fond husband's arms.VELEDA.And yet forgive me,Though with your words you charm my list'ning ear,And soothe each ravish'd sense to dear delight,Forgive Veleda, if alarming fearsCome like the raven o'er some wretches' cottage,Foreboding ill; this sad, this aching breast,Ev'n in your presence, mingles grief with rapture.ARMINIUS.Where now, Veleda, where thy wonted firmness?Is this a time for weak dejected passions?This night, you know, we storm the Roman camp,And bury all in ruin.VELEDA.In that rageOf unrelenting slaughter, my poor father—Ye gods, if possible, forgive his crimes!My father there may undistinguish'd fall,And add his body to the purple heap.ARMINIUS.Waste not a thought on him: degen'rate man!He has long since renounc'd the tender tiesThat bind in union, parents, sons, and friends.
All moral rectitude, all virtue lost,What hope remains? In a corrupted heartCrimes grow on crimes; the mind debas'd engendersPride, faction, murder, stratagems, and treason.Such is Segestes.VELEDA.He's my father still.ARMINIUS.He is a slave, a Roman slave; a vileDeserter, dead to honour, and the loveHe ow'd his country, that supreme of laws,Nature's great edict in the human heart.VELEDA.Yet for a father tears will force their way.ARMINIUS.Restrain your tears: your sorrow is ill-tim'd.Say, have you seen my squadrons? are they rang'dIn order for their march?VELEDA.Drawn up in ranksThey wait the signal. Fires, as you directed,Blaze through the camp, and as they dart aroundTheir sudden light'ning on the burnish'd arms,I saw the soldiers' looks: Each ardent eyeFlashes with martial fire. In silence fix'dEach warriour medidates his deeds of valour,His brave exploits; in fancy, ere he starts,His javelin quivers in a Roman's heart.ARMINIUS.Brave warlike men! I go this momentTo let them know the order of their march.But see where Inguiomer—VELEDA.Our tunefull bards,And all our German wives (a), resolv'd to urgeThe grand assault, and animate the fray,Are now assembled. I must hence with speedTo join the matrons, and their virgin train.[Exit.SCENE V. ARMINIUS and INGUIOMER.ARMINIUS.Are all things ready? Is there aught, my friend,Unthought of, unprovided?INGUIOMER.I have gome my roundThrough the wide camp: A nobler show of warWas ne'er display'd. Impatient of delayThey wield their javelins, and demand the signal.ARMINIUS.Anon our march begins: Well, Segimund,You come in haste.Enter SEGIMUND.SEGIMUND.I've summon'd all the chiefsTo meet you here: This way they bend their steps.ARMINIUS.I first must see the troops of my division.The men require my presence: With dispatchMy orders shall be giv'n; so tell the chiess.You, Inguiomer, receive them; let them hereWait my return: A moment brings me to you.[Exit.SCENE VI. INGUIOMER, SEGIMUND.SEGIMUND.The Gods in justice to mankind lead onA terrible example to the pride,And the ambition of these fierce invaders,Who well deserve their fate. They taste at RomeThe sweets of liberty, yet hither come,To the Visurgis' banks, to trample on the necksOf independent nations.INGUIOMER.There, my friend,You are deceiv'd; you know not all the truth.Rome is no longer free; her fam'd RepublicIs now no more; her boasted libertyYields to a tyrant, and long since she fledFar from soft seasons and Italian skies,To dwell in our tempestuous Northern clime,Henceforth a Scythian (b) and a German blessing.SEGIMUND.As such we'll cherish it: The warriors come.SCENE VII. Enter German Officers and Soldiers: They Line one side of the Stage; the BARDS at the top, and the Women behind them, with VELEDA in the Centre.INGUIOMER.My friends, I read impatience in your looks.The God of war inspires uncommon ardour.Soon will Arminius—SEGIMUND.Lo! the hero comes.SCENE VIII. Enter ARMINIUS.ARMINIUS.My fellow-warriors, you brave, gen'rous band,A great occasion calls us to the field,A glorious enterprize. Let us go forthThe champions of our country. We are summon'dBy the loud voice of nature; ev'ry motiveThat can excite, and animate our valour,All causes that inflame the heart of man,Conspire this night to draw the avenging sword.From hence I date the liberty of Germany.The REQUISITION of the proud invaderNo more shall force our sons to join their standard,And in a mass to fight their foreign wars.No more our virtuous wives, and virgin daughters,Shall suffer brutal lust and violation.The Romans are surrounded, close besieg'd;No means of flight: By the immortal gods,They are deliver'd victims to our swords.[A trumpet sounds.INGUIOMER.That sound proclaims the signal for the march.ARMINIUS.'Tis as I order'd: Oh! my gallant friends,My brave associates, if your country's causeGlows in your bosoms; if you feel the gloryOf your renown'd forefathers; if the flame,The sacred flame of liberty inspires you;If you prefer the plan of ancient lawsTo foreign tyrants, and a foreign yoke:Now grasp your javelins, now unsheathe your swords.In me behold your Gen'ral; in the field
Behold your fellow-soldier: follow me,Follow Arminius; I will marshal youTo fame, to liberty, immortal glory.[A warlike march.[Exit, followed by all.The Bards come forward, singing.1.Hark, warriors, hark!—That voice again!A warning voice! heard you the sound?To arms, it cries, to arms ye freeborn men;To arms the woods,To arms the floods,To arms, to arms, the echoing hills rebound.2.The thunder rolls; the light'nings glare;The gods are rushing to the plain;Their chariots glitter in the air;Death in his shroudRides in a cloud,And liberty calls forth her martial train.3.Ye warriors seek th' embattled throng;For freedom who his zeal displays,His fame shall live, —in sacred song;And tuneful rhyme,To latest timeThe Bards of Germany shall sound his praise.[Exeunt.The Women come forward, singing: VELEDA, in the centre.Yes, go, ye gen'rous band,Firm champions of the land,O'er all the fieldYour javelins wield;Where'er you rush, still in the rearYour wives and daughters you shall hear;Our war-songs, and our criesShall rend th' astonish'd skies,Till you unsluice a crimson flood,And stretch th' invaders welt'ring in their blood.[Exeunt; VELEDA following them.SCENE IX. The Roman Camp.MARCUS, VALERIUS.MARCUS.A night of such impenetrable darknessI scarce remember.VALERIUS.'Tis a night of horror,But safe from danger.MARCUS.Still at ev'ry postWe must keep careful watch.SCENE X. Enter CAECINA.CAECINA.In this deep gloom,This more than midnight horror, have you mark'dA stir, a motion from the adverse camp?MARCUS.There the barbarians sacrifice the hoursTo joy and revalry, and wild carousals.At intervals we hear them: hills and valleysRing with the hideous roar. Their blazing firesAt times illumine the incumbent clouds,And shew their distant camp.VALERIUS.From a deserterJust now arriv'd I learn their secret councils.He is a Gaul by birth.CAECINA.Where is he now?VALERIUS.At hand he waits your pleasure.CAECINA.Lead him hither.[Exit Valerius.We must break up our camp. GermanicusCan bring us no relief: The brawling wavesHave sunk his ships (c), and he perhaps is lost.An hour before the dawn we must depart.Marcus, let all be ready for our march.[Exit Marcus.SCENE II. CAECINA, and DUMNORIX, one of the GAULS.CAECINA.You come resolv'd to join the Roman banners.DUMNORIX.My name is Dumnorix; the friend of Rome;I hate Arminius and his wild ambition.CAECINA.When did you leave his camp?DUMNORIX.This very day,When Inguiomer before your conqu'ring swordCross'd the Visurgis. Then Arminius,Inflam'd to madness, burning for revenge,Vow'd the destruction of the Roman name.CAECINA.Means he this night to try the chance of war?DUMNORIX.This night his troops must rest: To-morrow's sunWill light him to the onset.CAECINA.For this newsYou have my thanks.DUMNORIX.I came with nobler views:Say but the word, and ev'n this very nightArminius may be conquer'd.CAECINA.Name the means.DUMNORIX.By a mix'd goblet dash'd with secret aconite,Or a barb'd arrow ting'd with deadly poison,I can dispatch him.CAECINA.Would'st thou thus instructA Roman Gen'ral in the trade of murder?A fell design, like yours, in elder timesWas offer'd to the Senate (d). That august,That great assembly scorn'd it with disdain,
And caution'd Pyrrhus to protect his life.Such was the virtue of the Roman state;It still survives: We conquer sword in hand,And wage no war by murder, or by poison.DUMNORIX.My friends from Gaul have sworn—CAECINA.Go, seek your friends—DUMNORIX.The glory may be mine—CAECINA.Away: no more;[Exit DUMNORIX.Detested perfidy!MARCUS. [Entering.What ho! to arms;Muster our forces; sound there, sound th' alarm.SCENE XII. CAECINA, MARCUS.CAECINA.Ha! Marcus, speak; what fraud? what stratagem?—MARCUS.While the barbarians riot in their camp,Their troops in silent order have advanc'd,And now invest our ramparts.Enter VALERIUS.VALERIUS.Haste, or all is lost;At the Praeterian gate collect our strength—CAECINA.Be that my care; go, where our works are weak;There make your firmest stand.[Exit, followed by soldiers.Enter a SOLDIER.SOLDIER.Marcus, this way;Haste to the Decuman; that gate's in danger.MARCUS.Valerius, come; the time demands our swords.SOLDIER.They've burst the pallisades, and o'er the FosseHave laid a bridge of hurdles; some alreadyHave burst into the camp; their wives and daughters,Kindling their fury, follow in the rear.MARCUS.Valerius, come; the time demands our valour.[A sound of trumpets, ExeuntVALERIUS, MARCUS, and Soldiers.SCENE XIII. Enter SEGESTES, on one side; SEGIMUND on the other.SEGESTES.Rash youth, whoe'er thou art, advance no farther;Retire, and quit the camp.SEGIMUND.Presume not, Roman,To give the law in Germany; that spot,You dare to tread on, is our sacred right,Our native soil: the sons of freedom scornTh' invader's proud command.SEGESTES.I warn you hence;Go, join your fugitives, or this right armShall cleave you to the ground.SEGIMUND.The gods of Germany thus claim their victim.[They fight.SEGESTES.That blow—too deep, —too deep—it pierces here—Thus I collect my strength; (lifts his arm) it will not be;My life-blood flows apace; the day is thine.[Falls on the ground.SEGIMUND.This shield, this javelin, and this plumed helmAre mine by conquest; they are my reward,The glorious trophies of superior valour.[Stoops to take off the helmet.SEGESTES.The hand of death is on me, and my eyes,My eyes are dim—and yet a glimm'ring rayBegins to dawn—I think, I know that face;Art thou, say, —speak—art thou my Segimund?Thou art, —Thou art my son—I die by thee—SEGIMUND.Gods! can it be?—is this—is this my Father?Enter MARCUS.MARCUS.The foe retires dismay'd; the camp is clear'd.Segestes slain! rash youth, this horrid deed—SEGESTES.He is my son;—oh! spare him;—spare his youth;He knew me not;—he did not know his father;Alas! I die.SEGIMUND.Yet stay, my father, stay;Live to redeem me from the horrid crimeOf parricide—SEGESTES.Oh! you are innocent;No guilt is thine; my error did it all;Oh! had I fall'n thus fighting for my country—Your hand, —oh! let me clasp it once again;Your father pardons you;—alas!—I die;That pang;—I die; just gods forgive my crimes—[He dies.SEGIMUND.His eyes are fix'd; the pulse of life is o'er;I, —I have murder'd him; the deed is mine,The horrid, impious, execrable deed!I have destroy'd, (e) the author of my being.MARCUS.Rise, soldier, rise; your grief atones for all.SEGIMUND.Roman, I am your pris'ner; strike your blow,Strike to my heart; do justice on a wretch,A man of blood, a terrible assassin;An impious parricide!—Here point your javelin,And let me, let me die in this embrace.MARCUS.Assist him, soldiers; raise him from the ground,And bear him hence.SEGIMUND.You shall not tear me from him.Oh! happy weapon!—'tis my father's dagger;It is his legacy; now do your office;[Stabs himself.
You're welcome to my heart;—by thee 'tis fitHis murderer should die.VELEDA. [Within.I heard his voice;My brother's voice; stand off, I will have way.MARCUS.What means that frantic woman?Enter VELEDA.VELEDA.Let me see him;Where is he?—Ha! my brother! On the earthWelt'ring in blood!—And is it thus, dear youth,Thus, miserable victim, thus expiring,Gasping in death, thus must Veleda see you!SEGIMUND.I know that voice; and now I see thee too,For the last time I see thee;—oh! my sister,There lies your father; a pale mangled corse;Entomb us both together;—in one graveLet us lie down in peace.—Farewel for ever.[Dies.VELEDA.Thus do we part!—Was it for this I follow'd you?MARCUS.They fought like gen'rous warriors; but the sonPrevail'd; he laid his father low in death,And then dispatch'd himself.VELEDA.What do I hear?He kill'd his father! Horror!—At the soundHumanity is shock'd!—yet for his countryHe grasp'd the javelin; in the cause of Rome
Segestes fell, and merited his fate.Yet for a father, filial tears will flow.MARCUS.Rise from the ground, and quit this mournful scene.VELEDA.Alas! my Segimund, no crime is thine.It is the guilt of tumult and revolt;The epidemic madness of the times;When discontent, and jealousy, and faction,When strife, and wild ambition sow the seedsOf party-rage; when civil discord armsSons against fathers, (f) brothers against brothers,Then kindred blood is spilt; then horrors multiply,And nature shudders at a sight like this.[Pointing to the dead bodies.MARCUS.My duty calls me hence; you must depart.VELEDA.Yet grant my pray'r, and by one gen'rous actShew that you Romans feel the touch of nature.Let me bear hence the bodies; in our campLet me interr them; let me lay togetherMy father and my brother, and with tearsPay the last office to their cold remains.In life divided, let one grave unite them.MARCUS.It shall be so; I yield to your request.Soldiers bear hence the bodies.[They are carried off.VELEDA.For this kindnessAccept my thanks. They both are now at peace.From this sad spectacle, this scene of woe,All Germany may learn the dire effects
That flow from party-rage.—This day may giveA lesson to the world, and teach the nationsThat civil union is their truest bliss;And late posterity, when these disastersShall be recorded by th' historic muse,May learn by our example to avoidThese fatal errors. Over crimes like these,Oh! may they shed a salutary tear,And fathers, sons, and families uniteOne voice, one heart, to guard their native land.End of the Fourth Act.ACT V.SCENE I. The German Camp.CHELDERIC, TREBANTES; Both of them Gauls.TREBANTES.CHELDERIC, these Germans made a bold assault,But Roman discipline repell'd the furyOf wild barbarians.CHELDERIC.For this night they've conquer'd;But in broad day-light what must be their fate?Their little army cannot meet the numbersWith which Arminius covers all the plain.As well the level shore may stand the furyOf the rough northern sea, when lash'd by windsIt rolls its mountain billows on the land.TREBANTES.And yet, if our proposal has been heard;If from the Roman Dumnorix has metWith due applause, a cheap, an easy victoryWill end the war.CHELDERIC.And lo! our hero comes.SCENE II. To them DUMNORIX.CHELDERIC.Dumnorix you're welcome.DUMNORIX.To avoidAll prying eyes, I've walk'd a weary roundThrough woods, and fens.CHELDERIC.And does the Roman chiefApprove our plot?DUMNORIX.Is thus Caecina known?Govern'd by scruples, by fantastic rulesOf pride, of honour, and dry musty maxims,He talk'd, I know not what of ancient Rome,And scorns our proferr'd aid.CHELDERIC.Short-sighted man!His low contracted spirit will not see,That victory obtain'd by fraud, or valour,Ensures success; (a) and cover'd stratagemAlike with laurels decks the hero's brow.DUMNORIX.Caecina is no general: I talk'dWith the brave leaders of th' allies from Gaul:All with one voice applaud our enterprize.They promise bright rewards: no more at present,I hear the sound of steps this way advancing.We will confer in private—SCENE III. To them GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.Our whole armyIs under arms; all at their pròper posts.What keeps you from your station?DUMNORIX.Has ArminiusEnter'd the camp?GOTHMUND.Not yet; do you go forth,And join your standards: loiter here no more.[Exeunt DUMNORIX, CHELDERIC, TREBANTES.What mean those Gauls? What brings them thus together?They meditate some dark design; perhapsTo be deserters to the Roman camp.SCENE IV. INGUIOMER, GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.What of Arminius?INGUIOMER.Frequent messengersWith eager speed come posting to the camp.Arminius is at hand; to me he sendsHis orders; all must rest upon their armsReady for action, when occasion calls.GOTHMUND.His warlike spirit never knows a pauseNo danger can deter him, nought can checkHis active genius, till he tow'rs aboveWhate'er oppos'd his course.INGUIOMER.To-morrow's dawnWe'll see him, with determin'd vigourRush to the field, and thunder through the war.SCENE V. To them EGBERT.EGBERT.Marcus, the Roman officer, has gain'dA passport to the camp. He says he bringsA message of high import from Caecina.INGUIOMER.Conduct him hither.[Exit EGBERT.On his narrow isthmusBesieg'd, and sore beset, perhaps the RomanMeans to capitulate.SCENE VI. Enter MARCUS.MARCUS.Caecina sends meTo claim an audience of Arminius.INGUIOMER.He soon will join us here. What is your errand?MARCUS.Our Gen'ral sends this letter to your Chief;A letter fraught with matters of high moment.INGUIOMER.Say, do you come to offer terms of peace?MARCUS.Soon as Arminius sees the generous spirit,That sways, directs, and guides Caecina's heart,
Your Chief may think hostilities should cease,And with the sympathy of noble minds,Unite in ties of friendship.INGUIOMER.This to meIs a dark mystery: unfold your purpose.MARCUS.Here in your very camp a plot is form'dAgainst Arminius's life: no more has reach'dMy ear; that letter will disclose the whole.Gives the letter.Here ends my embassy; the time demandsThat I return with speed to join our friends.INGUIOMER.Egbert, be it yours to guard him hence.Give him safe conduct to the Roman camp.[Exeunt MARCUS and EGBERT.SCENE VII. INGUIOMER, GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.A dark conspiracy against the lifeOf our brave Chief, here in our very camp!INGUIOMER.You hear it gods! and does your thunder sleep?Will you not send your forked lightning down,Wing'd with red vengeance on the traitor's head?GOTHMUND.Soon as Arminius—[Sound of trumpets.INGUIOMER.In good time he comes.That trumpet's clangour speaks the Chief's arriv'd.SCENE VIII. Enter ARMINIUS, attended by guards.ARMINIUS.Inguiomer, these checks but serve to animateThe martial spirit of a warlike race.INGUIOMER.Protected by the friendly gloom of nightCaecina and his army stood at bay:Around their camp no glim'ring ray of lightShew'd us their works: mean time our lamps and torchesMade us a mark for all their missive weapons.Our lights extinguish'd, courage then was useless;Disorder and consusion follow'd. None could seeWhere to assault: I sounded a retreat.ARMINIUS.Wisely you judg'd: to-morrow's orient sunShall see his legions overwhelm'd in ruin.INGUIOMER.Since then an officer has brought this letter:It is address'd to you.ARMINIUS.To me a letter!Give it; let me see it.[Reads.The sense of honour that governs the mind of a Roman general, will be seen in this letter. I write to caution you against a foul conspiracy. A Gaul this day deserted from your army. The villain has set a price upon your life, and for that reward is ready to end your days by poison. I need not tell you that I rejected his offer with indignation. An enemy in the field, I scorn
the trade of a base assassin. Be upon your guard against clandestine enemies. Farewell.If this be true, I can almost allowA Roman still may have a sense of honour.If any Gauls are lurking in our army—GOTHMUND.Their number is not great; but I have watch'd themWith an observant eye.ARMINIUS.They are a traiterous race.Had they made head against the Roman armsLike men, who knew the value of their liberty,Th' imperial Eagles soon had wing'd their flightTo their Italian realms; and slaveryRepass'd their Alpine hills, to dwell at RomeAnd with their senate kneel at Caesar's feet.INGUIOMER.They fought in parties, and the whole was conquer'd.ARMINIUS.All civil union was to them unknown;Strangers to liberty, and now subduedTo crouch in bondage; the ambitious slavesWould raise the tree of tyranny, and overturnIn every state, in all the nations round them,The laws that hold society in peace.INGUIOMER.We must be wary; Gothmund, we must lookWith circumspective eyes; watch ev'ry motion,All secret meetings, and by due attentionMar this detested project.ARMINIUS.For his conductCaecina claims both gratitude and praise.But has he sent that false perfidious GaulBack to our camp?GOTHMUND.The traitor still is there.ARMINIUS.Let a well chosen officer be sentTo tell Caecina that his gen'rous actionReflects a lustre on his name: but stillTo crown the deed with glory, the assassinMust be deliver'd up to justice; tell him'Tis my request.INGUIOMER.Soon as the slave arrivesA strict enquiry will afford a clue,To guide us through the maze of their designs,And trace the Gauls, who tamper'd in the treason.ARMINIUS.Gothmund, do you select some trusty officerTo bear our message: let him strait depart.[Exit GOTHMUND.INGUIOMER.Caecina will comply.ARMINIUS.And if he does,I in my turn will act a gen'rous part.His little army shall have leave to marchFree, unmolested to the distant Rhine.I'll sheath the sword, and for such splendid meritSpare the effusion o'en of Roman blood.How wears the night?INGUIOMER.'Tis now the second watch.ARMINIUS.Are the troops all arrang'd, as I directed?INGUIOMER.They're under arms, and at their sev'ral postsAll watchful stand, impatient to renewThe charge, and though repuls'd, with joy they findThey have sustain'd no loss.ARMINIUS.They have sustain'dA loss we all must feel, and long must mourn.That brave, heroic youth, the gallant Segimund,Whose early virtues were by all admir'd;Who won each soldier's love; whose spring of lifePromis'd an harvest of immortal glory;He is no more.INGUIOMER.No hostile hand subdued him.ARMINIUS.Alas! I know the whole disast'rous story.I've seen Veleda; she has told me all.I left her paying the last funeral ritesTo her lov'd brother: to her father tooShe grants sepulchral honours, though his crimesDrew vengeance on his head. Veleda's virtueIs ever lovely, and adorns her name.She mourns a father lost, and while to himShe pours the heartfelt tribute of her tears,Her filial piety demands our praise.SCENE IX. To them GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.Your orders are obey'd. I have dispatch'dA deputation to the adverse camp.ARMINIUS.The time now calls for action: Inguiomer,We will go forth to visit ev'ry post,And with true ardour fire the soldier's breast.[Exeunt ARMINIUS and INGUIOMER.GOTHMUND.Would that this treach'rous Gaul were in our pow'r.Upon the rack the slave shall die in torment,And his accomplices shall share his fate.SCENE X. To him VELEDA.VELEDA.Oh! 'tis too much—this agony of mind,It is too much;—it pierces to the quick;It rends each tremb'ling nerve about the heart.GOTHMUND.Veleda, why this violence of sorrow?VELEDA.Oh! Gothmund, the adventures of this night—GOTHMUND.Do they afflict you? The dun shades of nightShelter'd the foe; we sounded a retreat,But at the dawn Arminius will revenge it.His plan is form'd already.VELEDA.Well I knowArminius has resources in his vast,His warlike genius. But with all his valourCan he assuage my sorrows? I have lostMore than the treasury of words can tell;More than imagination can conceive.My brother Segimund! He's lost for ever.GOTHMUND.For him our men are overwhelm'd with sorrow.We all lament his fate.VELEDA.I know all must;But bitter anguish is for me alone.I found him in the moment of his victory,Gash'd, mangled, bleeding, gasping on the ground,Like a fair flow'r, in all its blushing honours,Shorn by the scythe, and with'ring in its bloom.GOTHMUND.It was his own rash act: he knew no guilt.VELEDA.It was his father's crime: his father fellIn arms against his country. Segimund,Unconscious, struck the blow for justice.But the affections of a heart like hisPierc'd to his soul, and drove him to despair.Dear youth, he's lost: and with him ev'ry virtue,Heroic ardour, honour, truth, and love,And ev'ry grace that could adorn his youth,To full perfection rising: all is vanish'd;All, all is lost, for ever, ever lost.GOTHMUND.Arminius still remains; his tender careWill minister relief, and heal your woes.VELEDA.Arminius is the idol I adore;But busy memory will know no rest.A much lov'd brother will be ever present;His lovely image still will glide before me,But these sad eyes must never more behold him.I've wash'd his wounds, and bath'd him with my tears;Over his clay cold corse I've thrown my mantle;Close to his side I've laid his warlike javelin;And, as he order'd, stretch'd his father by him.In his cold grave he rests: but worth like hisWill ever live, and with his fame enrichThe annals of his country.[A deep Groan is heard from a distance.Hark! that sudden groan—GOTHMUND.Be not alarm'd: you soon shall know the cause.[Exit.VELEDA.Almighty Gods! if from your stores of wrathYour awful will prepares some new affliction,Suspend your purpofe; spare a wretch like me.Gothmund, you look aghast.Enter GOTHMUND.GOTHMUND.I scarce can speak;My blood recoils; my tongue denies its office.VELEDA.Ha! what disaster? speak, relieve my fears.GOTHMUND.On his tribunal as Arminius stood,In act to animate the list'ning soldiers,While torches cast their vivid blaze around him,A barbed arrow from some ambush'd villainFlew to its destin'd mark, and pierc'd his heart.VELEDA.Let me this moment fly to his relief.[Exit VELEDA.GOTHMUND.Relief I fear is vain: speak, Egbert, fay,How fares Arminius?Enter EGBERT.EGBERT.All who boast their skillIn medicinal lore, exert their artTo draw the arrow from his bleeding wound.Enter VELEDA.VELEDA.Oh! what a spectacle of woe and horror!This way they lead him; what a sight is there?Pale, pale, and wan! ye gods protect his life.SCENE THE LAST. ARMINIUS is led forward; INGUIOMER, Officers, Women, and Soldiers round him.ARMINIUS.Assist me; lend your aid; conduct me forward;A little onward;—here, —here set me down.VELEDA.Arminius, speak; 'tis your Veleda calls.How fare you now?ARMINIUS.Oh! I am sick at heart;My strength decays; fair day-light closes o'er me;Approach; draw near; let me once more behold you.VELEDA.My feeble frame gives way; my flutt'ring heartThrobs wild with agony; it sinks within me.Gods! is there no relief?—Compose your spirits;Rest may restore you.ARMINIUS.Oh! no rest for me;The barbed arrow pierc'd too deep, —too deep.They wrench'd it out; they made a breach in nature;They tore my frame asunder.VELEDA.To these woundsThe healing art may minister relief.ARMINIUS.Nought can avail; the swift, the subtle poison—VELEDA.Poison!ARMINIUS.It burns, —it rankles in my veins.VELEDA.Oh! let me with these lips draw forth the venom;The deadly aconite (c) let me imbibe,That I may save all that my heart adores.ARMINIUS.You are too good;—the poison is diffus'dThrough all my frame;—it burns; an inward fireConsumes my veins; those pangs must end me soon.Enter EGBERT.EGBERT.Inguiomer, our Herald is return'd.The treach'rous Gaul he finds is in our camp.His name is Dumnorix—GOTHMUND.That slave is seiz'd,With his accomplices; they all shall suffer,Whate'er the keenest torture can inflict.ARMINIUS.Let not a thought of me, let no resentmentInspire revenge and cruelty: proceedAs justice warrants, and the laws direct.EGBERT.The Romans in despair have fled their camp;Already they have cross'd the narrow isthmus,And urge by rapid marches tow'rd the Rhine.ARMINIUS.Assist me; raise me up: All gracious pow'rs!Ye guardian gods of Germany! to youI lift my hands; to you in gratitudeI bow thus lowly down; to you I offerMy humble adoration!—I have liv'dTo see my country free; once more to seeThe Roman Eagles and their boasted legionsIn terror wing their flight across the Phine.
They are exterminated; they are gone;They've vanish'd from the land:—I die content.[Falls back in his chair.VELEDA.Is there no help to save so dear a life?Bring ev'ry aid:—a pale, a livid hueSpreads o'er his features;—see, —his eyes are fix'd.ARMINIUS.Raise me once again: Now, mark my words;Should the ambition of aspiring RomeMuster her legions; should her arms prevail,And leave no spot, where freedom can reside;Bear to my Saxon friends my last advice.Let them embark for Britain; there they'll findA brave, a hardy race, who by their valourMade Caesar from their coast unfurl his sails,And save his legions by inglorious flight.INGUIOMER.Your orders shall be faithfully perform'd.ARMINIUS.Yet more;—when landed on that happy shore,Let my friends join in union with the natives.Britons and Saxons there may form one people;And from the woods (d) of Germany importA form of government, a plan of lawsWise, just, and equitable; laws of forceTo guard the gen'ral weal, and on the baseOf public liberty, of social order,And equal justice, raise the noblest fabricOf civil union, like their own proud cliffs'Midst wild commotions still to stand unshaken,And be in time the envy of the world.VELEDA.My spirits sink; I faint; support me—[Leans on a Woman's arm.INGUIOMER.Ev'n now,When flutt'ring life is on the wing to leave him,The safety of his friends claims all his care.ARMINIUS. [Raising himself.Another word; it is my warning voice.Let Britons guard their coast against the Gauls,And never, —never let that treach'rous race,NOR THEIR DESCENDANTS to the latest time,Obtain a footing on their sea-girt isle.Let Britons seize the trident of the main,And plunge th' invaders in the roaring surge;A band of slaves, who would reduce mankindTo their own level, and enslave the world:An hoard of savages, freebooters, murderers,Who trample on all laws; who own no gods;Whom in a mass their country disembogues,By depredations to lay waste their neighbours,And spread rebellion, anarchy, and ruin.VELEDA.Alas! these strong exertions are too much;They waste his vital spirit:—See—behold him;He faints; he dies; and oh! must I survive him?ARMINIUS.I burn; I burn; that pang; 'tis past; and yet,Thus ling'ring on the margin of both worlds,A ray of light perhaps breaks in upon me.—A time may come, when Germany shall sendA royal race, allied to Britain's kings,To reign in glory o'er a willing people.
—I see the radiant aera dawn; I see.The great event, when in a distant ageA monarch sprung from that illustrious lineShall guide the state, give energy to laws,And guard the rights of man; his throne encircl'd,Adorn'd, illumin'd by a train of virtues,That win all hearts, and arm each honest handIn the great cause of freedom, and the laws,For which their ancestors in ev'ry ageToil'd, fought, and bravely conquer'd; then bequeath'dSeal'd with their blood a glorious legacy,A SACRED TRUST to all succeeding times.[Sinks back in his chair.VELEDA.Alas! he dies; is there no art to softenThese mortal pangs? Support him, Inguiomer;Assuage his sorrows; lull him to repose.ARMINIUS.Farewell, my friends;—farewell;—I can no more;Life ebbs apace; my weary nature sinks;Yet ere I die, —Veleda, —once again.VELEDA.My feeble frame;—conduct me; lead me to him—ARMINIUS.My eyes are dim—where are you? reach your hand.[Offers his hand, falls back, and dies.INGUIOMER.There fled the best, the purest, noblest spiritThat e'er inform'd the patriot breast.VELEDA.To meWhat now is life? —I will not linger hereIn this bad world, a miserable wretch,
Condemn'd to solitude, and endless woe.Give me this dagger; (snatches it) now, Arminius, now,I come;—I follow thee—[Going to strike.INGUIOMER.Restrain this rage, this frantic, wild despair.[Holds her arm.VELEDA.Off;—set me free;—you shall not chain me downIn agony of mind, in restless misery.Oh! let me follow him;—Arminius, no,No, nothing shall divorce us.[Raising her arm.A FEMALE ATTENDANT.Horror! forbear; I must arrest your arm;The blow that ends you, murders innocence.A mother still should hear the voice of nature.VELEDA.Why hold me thus?—and yet, those tender accents—FEMALE ATTENDANT.Think of the infant whom you still support;The precious babe that waits to see the light.VELEDA.My precious babe![Looking tenderly at her.FEMALE ATTENDANT.'Tis yours to rear and cherish it.VELEDA.My unborn babe, that waits to see the light.[Melts into tears, and her dagger fulls.INGUIOMER.This is thy triumph, pow'rful nature; thisThy gen'rous instinct; thou prime source of virtue!VELEDA.Oh! what a precipice of guilt and horrorHave I escap'd! My child destroy'd by me,
Ev'n by the mother's hand!—unbidden tears,You choak all utt'rance; the bare image strikes,It cleaves my very heart—Arminius, nowFarewell awhile; you point me back to life;You bid me here endure the load of grief,To rear the tender charge you have bequeath'd me.That duty done, perhaps the gods may sendA son, to emulate your great example.Grant me that pray'r, and then with joy, with transport,From this sad dreary world I'll wing my flight,To trace your path in yon empyreal skies.[Lies by the body.INGUIOMER.There died the friend of liberty and man,The champion of his country!—O'er his relicksA grand, a splendid monument shall rise,Deck'd with the spoils of many a well-fought field,With Roman Eagles, and Imperial banners,The trophies of his wars. The hallow'd mouldThe sons of Germany with pilgrim feetShall oft revisit; with their tears embalmHis clay-cold ashes, and then sighing sayAt length Arminius rests from toil and danger,With all his country's blessings on his head.FINIS.NOTES ON THE TRAGEDY OF ARMINIUS.ACT I.(a) CUNCTA pariter Romanis adversa: Locus uligine profundâ, idem ad gradum instabilis, procedentibus Lubricus; Corpora gravia Loricis, neque Librare pila inter undas poterant. Contra Cheruscis sueta apud paludes praelia, procera membra, hastae ingentes ad vulnera faciunda; quamvis procul. Annal. i S. 64. Arminius cum delectis Scindit agmen, Equisque maxime vulnera ingerit: illi Sanguine suo, et Lubrico paludum Lapsantes, Excussis Rectoribus disjicere obvios, proterere jacentes. Annal. i. S. 54, 55.(b) Neque multo post Legati a Segeste venerunt, auxilium orantes adversus vim popularium, a quêis Circumsidebatur; Validiore apud Eos Arminio, quando Bellum suadebat. Germanico pretium fuit, Convertere Agmen; pugnatumque in obsidentes, et Ereptus Segestes magnâ cum propinquorum et Clientium Manu. Annal. Lib. i. S. 57.(c) Non hic mihi primus Erga Populum Romanum fidei et Constantiae dies: Ex quo a Divo Augusto Civitate donatus sum, amicos inimicosque ex vestris Utilitatibus delegi; neque odio patriae, verum quia Romanis Germanisque idem conducere, et pacem quàm Bellum probabam. Annal. Lib. i S. 58.(d) Addiderat Segestes Legatis filium, nomine Segimundum: sed Juvenis Conscientiâ cunctabatur; quippe anno, quo Germaniae descivêre, Sacerdos apud Aram Ubiorum Creatus ruperat vittas, profugus ad Rebelles. Annal. i. S. 57.(c) Inerant faeminae nobiles, inter quas Uxor Arminii, eademque filia Segestis, mariti magis quàm parentis animo, neque victa in Lacrymas, neque voce supplex, compressis intra sinum manibus, gravidam Uterum intuenas. Annal. i. S. 57.(f) Filiam necessitate huc Adductam fateor: tuum erit consultare, utrum praevaleat, quod ex Arminio concepit, an quod ex me Genita est. Annal. Lib. i. S. 58.ACT II.(a) See as above, Annal. i. S. 57.(b) Plures Caesar classi impositas per flumen Amisiam Oceano invexit. Ac primo placidum AEquor mille navium remis strepere, aut Velis impelli: mox atro nubium globo Effusa Grando: simul variis undique procellis incerti fluctus prospectum Adimere, regimen impedire; Milesque
pavidus, et casuum maris ignorus, dum turbat Nautas, vel intempestive juvat, officia prudentium Corrumpebat: Omne dehinc caelum, et mare omne in Austrum cessit, qui tumidis Germaniae terris, profundis Amnibus, immenso nubium tractu validus, et rigore vicini Septemtrionis horridior, rapuit disjecitque naves in aperta Oceani, aut Insulas Saxis abruptis, vel per occulta vada infestas. Pars Navium haustae sunt; plures apud Insulas Longius sitas Ejectae. Sola Germanici triremis Chaucorum terram adpulit; Quem per omnes illos dies noctesque apud Scopulos et prominentes oras, cum se tanti Exitii reum clamitaret, Vix Cohibuere amici quominus Eodem Mari oppeteret. Annal. Lib. ii. S. 23, 24.(c) Arminius irrupere Germanos jubet, Clamitans, "En Varus, et Eodem iterum fato Victae Legiones."— Annal. i. S. 65.(d) Dotem non Uxor Marito, sed Uxori Maritus offert. Inter haec munera Uxor accipitur, atque Invicem ipsa armorum aliquid Viro offert. Hoc Maximum Vinculum, haec arcana sacra, hos Conjudales Deos Arbitrantur.— De moribus Germ. S. 18.(e) Arminius, "ut Liceret cum fratre colloqui" oravit. Erat is in Exercitu Cognomento Flavius, insignis fide, et amisso par vulnus oculo paucis ante Annis, duce Tiberio: tum permissum; progressusque salutatur ab Arminio, qui amotis Stipatoribus, "ut Sagittarii nostrâ pro Ripâ dispositi Abscederent," postulat; et postquam digressi, "Unde ea deformitas Oris?" Interrogat fratrem: illo Locum et praeliam referente, "Quodnam praemium recepiffet?" Exquirit. Flavius Aucta Stipendia, Torquem, et Coronam, aliaque militaria dona memorat, irridente
dente Arminio vilia Servitii Praemia. Exin Diversi ordiuntur: Hic Magnitudinem Romanam, opes Caesaris, et victis graves poenas; in deditionem venienti paratam clementiam; neque conjugem et filium ejus hostiliter haberi. "Paulatim inde ad jurgia prolapsi, quominus pugnam Consererent, ne flumine quidem interjecto cohibebantur, ni Stertinius adcurrens plenum irae, armaque et equum poscentem Flavium attinuisset. Cernabatur contrà minitabundus Arminius, praeliumque denuntians; nam pleraque Latino Sermone interjaciebat, ut qui Romanis in Castris ductor Popularium meruisset.— Annal. Lib. ii. S. 9, 10.(f) See the last Note.(g) Irridenti Arminio vilia servitii praemia. Annal. Lib. xi. S. 9.(h) Arminius fas patriae, Libertatem avitam, penetrales Germaniae Deos, Matrum precum sociam, ne propinquorum et adfinium, denique generis sui desertor et Proditor quam Imperator esse mallet. Annal. Lib. ii. S. 10.ACT III.(a) Exigunt enim principis sui liberalitate illum Bellatorem equum, illam cruentam victricemque frameam.— De Morib. Germ. S. 14.(b) CIVILIS matrem suam sororesque, simul omnium conjuges, parvosque Liberos consistere a tergo jubet;
Hortamenta victoriae, vel pulsis pudorem: Virorum cantu, et faeminarum ululatu somuit acies. Tacit. Hist. iv. S. 18.(c) Ne se mulier extra virtutum cogitationes, extraque Bellorum casus putet, ipsis incipientis matrimonii auspiciis admonetur, venire se Laborum periculorumque sociam, idem in pace, idem in Bello passuram ausuramque: Hoc juncti Boves, hoc paratus equus, hoc data arma denuntiant. Sic vivendum, sic pereundum. Tacit. de Morib. Germ. S. 18.(d) Satis diu vel Naturae vixisse, vel gloriae. Cicero pro Marcello.(e) Sunt illis quoque Carmina, quorum Relatu, quem Barditum vocant, accendunt animos, futuraeque pugnae fortunam ipso cantu augurantur. Tacit. de Morib. Germ. S. 3.(f) Varianam cladem paene exitiabilem, tribus legionibus, cum duce Legatisque, et auxiliis omnibus caesis. Adeo namque Consternatum Augustum ferunt, ut per continuos Menses barbâ capilloque summisso, Caput interdum foribus illideret, vociferans, "QUINCTILI VARE LEGIONES REDDE." Sueton. August: S. 23.(g) See an account of the Canadian War-songs, Charlevoix, Voyage de L'Amerique. See also European Settlements in America. Vol. i.(h) Segestem Germanos nunquam satis Excusaturos, quod inter Albim et Rhenum Virgas, et secures, et togam viderint. Annal. Lib. i. S. 59.(i) Raptores orbis, postquam cuncta vastantibus defuere, terras, et maria Scrutantur: Si Locuples Hostis eft;
AVARI: Si pauper, AMBITIOSI: Soli omnium opes atque inopiam pari affectu concupiscunt: auserre, trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus IMPERIUM, atque ubi solitudinem faciunt, PACEM appellant. Tacit. Agricola, S. 30.(k) Non cauponantes Bellum, sed Belligerantes. Ennus.(l) Avitus ipsi Boiocalo ob memoriam Amicitiae, daturum agros pollicitus; quod ille, ut proditionis pretium, aspernatus, addidit, "DEESSE NODIS TERRA, IN QUA VIVAMUS, IN QUA MORIAMUR, NON POTEST." Annal. Lib. xiii. S. 56.ACT IV.(a) Nec minor cum Uxoribus Eorum pugna, quam cum ipsis uit; quum objectis undique plaustris atque carpentis, altae desuper, quasi e turribus, Lanceis contisquè pugnarent. Florus, Lib. iii. Cap. 3.Vos quoque, qui fortes animas Belloque peremptasLaudibus in Longum Vates dimittitis Aevum,Plurima Securi fudistis Carmina BARDI.Lucan, Pharsalia, Lib. i. V. 447.(b)Libertas ultra Tigrim, Rhenumque recessit,Ac toties mobis jugulo quaesita negatur,Germanum Scythicumque Bonum.Lucan, Lib. vii. V. 433.(c) See Act I. Note (b).(d) Timochares Ambraciensis Fabricio Consuli pollicitus est, se Pyrrhum veneno per silium suum, qui potionibus ejus praeerat, necaturum. Ea res cùm ad Senatum esset delata, missis Legatis Pyrrhum monuit, ut adversus hujus generis insidias cautius se gereret, memor urbem a a filio Martis Conditam, et armis Bella, non venenis, gerere debere. Timocharis autem Nomen suppressit, Utroque modo AEquitatem amplexus; quia nec hostem malo exemplo tollere, neque cum, qui bene mercri paratus suerat, prodere voluit. Val. Maxim. Lib. vi. Cap. 5.Reperio apud Scriptores Senatoresque Eorum Temporum, Adgandestrii, principis Cattorum, Lectas in Senatu Literas, quibus "mortem Arminii" promittebat, "si patrandoe neci venenum mitteretur;" Responsumque esse, non fraude, neque occultis, sed palam et armatum populum Romanum hostes suos ulcisci; quâ gloriâ aequabat se Tiberius priscis Imperator. bus, qui venenum in Pyrrhum Regem vetuerant, prodidrantque. Annal. Lib. ii. S. 88.(e) Eo notabilior Caedes fuit, quia filius Patrem interfecit: Rem, nomniaque, auctore Vipstanio Messalâ, tradam. Julius Mansuetus, ex Hispaniâ, RAPACI Legioni additus, impubem filium domi Liquerat: is mox adultus, inter SEPTIMANOS a Galbâ conscriptus, oblatum forte patrem, et vulnere stratum, dum semianimem scrutatur, Agnitus, agnoscensque, et exsanguem amplexus, voce flebili precabatur "Placatos patris manes," Neve se ut parricidam aversarentur; publicum id facinus; et unum militem quotam Civilium Armorum partem.— Simul attollere corpus, aperire humum, supremo erga parentem officio fungi. Advertere proximi, deinde plures: Hinc per omnem aciem Miraculum, et quaestus, et saevissimi Belli Execratio: nec eo segnius propinquos, adfines,
fratres trucidatos spoliant: Factum esse scelus Loquuntur, faciuntque. Tacit. Hist. Lib. iii. S. 25.Ceterum et prioribus Civilibus Bellis par Scelus inciderat; nam praelio, quo ad Janiculum adversus Cinnam pugnatum est, Pompeianus Miles fratrem suum, dein, cognito facinore, seipsum interfecit, ut Sisenna memorat: tanto acrior apud Majores, sicut Virtutis gloria, ita flagitiis Paenitentia fuit. Tacit. Hist. Lib. iii. S. 50.(f) VOLTAIRE, in his HENRIADE, had his eye upon the passages in Tacitus cited in the former note. He describes a father, in the heat of battle, engaged with his son: An extract from the Episode will, probably, be acceptable to the reader.
En fin vieux d'Ailly, par un coup malheureuxFait tomber a ses pieds ce Guerrier genereux.Ses yeux sont pour jamais fermés a la Lumiére;Son Casque aupres de lui roule sur la Poussiére.D'Ailly voit son visage: "O desespoir! O Cris!"Il le voit; il L'embrasse: "HELAS C'EST MON FILS"Le Pére infortuné, les yeux baignés de Larmes,Tournait contre son sein ses parricides armes;On L'arrête, on s'oppose a sa juste fureur;Il s'arrache en tremblant de ce Lieu plein d'horreur;Il deteste a jamais sa coupable Victoire;Et se fuyant Lui-même, au milieu des deserts,Il va cacher sa peine au bout de L'Univers.Là, soit que Le Soleil rendit Le jour au monde,Soit qu'il finit sa course au vaste sein de L'onde,Sa voix faisait redire aux échos attendrisLe nom, le triste nom de son malheureux fils.
Du heros expirant la jeune et tendre amante,Par la terreur conduite, incertaine, tremblante,Vient d'un pied chancelant sur ces funestes bords;Elle cherche, elle voit dans la soule des morts,Elle voit son époux; elle tombe éperdue;Le voile de la mort se repand sur sa vue;"Eft-ce toi, cher amant?"—Ces mots interrompus,Ces cris demi-formés ne sont point entendus;Elle r'ouvre les yeux; sa bouche presse encore,Par ses derniers baisers, la bouche qu'elle adore:Elle tient dans ses bras ce corps pâle et sanglant,Le regarde, soupire, et meurt en l'embrassant.Père, époux malheureux, famille deplorable,Des fureurs de ces tems exemple lamentable,Puisse de ce combat le souvenir affreuxExciter la pitié de nos derniers neveaux,Arracher à leurs yeux des larmes salutaires,Et qu'ils n'imitent point les crimes de leurs pères.HENRIADE, Chant viii, V. 255.ACT V.(a)Mutemus Clypeos, Danaûmque insignia nobisAptemus; dolus, an virtus, quis in hoste requirat?VIRG; AENEID: Lib. li, V. 390.(c)Si l'on veut lire l'admirable ouvrage de Tacits fur lesMoeurs des Germains, on verra que c'est d'eux que lesANGLOIS ont tiré l'idée de leur Gouvernement Politique.Ce beau Systême a été trouvé dans les bois.L'Esprit des Loix, Lib. xi, Cap. 6.BOOKS, SOLD BY BARKER AND SON, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, COVENT GARDEN.THE PLAYS OF SHAKESPEARE, with the Notes of various Commentators, prepared for the Press by G. Steevens, Esq. edited by J. Reed, Esq. 21 vol. 8vo.SCENE PLATES FOR THE ILLUSTRATION OF SHAKESPEARE, finely engraved by Hall, Grignion, &c. &c. 38 in Number, worked off on Royal Paper, 158.SHAKESPEARE; various EditionsTHE HISTRIONADE, OR THEATRIC TRIBUNAL, a Poem, descriptive of the principal Performers at both Houses, by the late Mr. Thomas Dermody, 25 6dMASON ON BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER, with an Appendix on Shakespeare, 7sECCLES' KING LEAR AND CYMBELINE, with the Illustrations of the various Commentators, 2 vol. 12sBARKER's COMPLETE LIST OF PLAYS, exhibiting, at one View, the Title, Size. Date and Author, from the Commencement of Theatrical Performances to 1803, 5sVICTOR's HISTORY OF THE THEATRES OF LONDON AND DUBLIN, from 1730, with an Annual Register, from 1712, 3 vol. 9sCOOKE's ELEMENTS OF DRAMATIC CRITICISM, containing an Analysis of the Stage, Instructions for succeeding in the Art of Acting, &c. 3s 6dVANBRUGH's PLAYS, 2 vol. 6sCIBBER's PLAYS, 5 vol. 15sROWE's PLAYS, 2 vol. 6sCROSS's PARNASIAN BAGATELLES, 4sODES OF SIR CHARLES HANBURY WILLIAMS, 3s 6dLIFE OF THE DUCHESS OF KINGSTON, portrait, 3s 6dESSAY ON THE CHARACTER OF HAMLET, 1sMACKLIN's MAN OF THE WORLD, AND LOVE A-LAMODE, finely printed in quarto, beautiful portrait of the Author, 7s 6dWALKER's MEMOIRS OF ITALIAN TRAGEDY, plates, neatly printed in quarto, 14sPrinted by Barker and Son, Great Russell Street, Covent Garden.