Who's the Dupe? A FARCE: As it is ACTED at the THEATRE-ROYAL IN
DRURY-LANE.By Mrs. COWLEY, AUTHOR of the RUNAWAY, a COMEDY.LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY, L. DAVIS, W. OWEN, S. CROW∣DER, T.
LONGMAN, T. CADELL, T. BECKET, and Messrs. CARNAN and NEWBERY.
MDCCLXXIX.ADVERTISEMENT.THE Reader will find Passages in the following Scenes, which
are not spoken on the Stage. Actors of skill and ability, ac∣quainted with
the ideas of the Writer, and assisted by all the advantages of
Stage-repre∣sentation, give impressions of character and situation with
more expedition and certainty than can be done by Words alone; elucida∣tions,
which may be necessary for the Reader, are therefore very frequently and
properly omitted by them.The Author owes too much to the very excellent manner in which the
Farce is acted, not to seize this opportunity of acknow∣ledging her
obligations to the Performers.Judging from her own experience, as well as her observation on
that of others, she feels that Authors are so far from having reason to
join in the common clamour on the declension  of the Stage,
that there has been no period in which performances in the Comic line have been
represented with such uniform strength: and though it is impossible
for her to form distinctions on the merit of so perfect a
repre∣sentation, yet she cannot omit expressing her particular
obligations to Mr. King, for accept∣ing, from the best motives, and in the
most polite and candid manner, a part not perfectly agreeable to himself,
but which owes its effect principally to his performance.CHARACTERS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.DOILEYMr. ParsonsSANDFORDMr. AickinGRANGERMr. PalmerGRADUSMr. KingWOMEN.ELIZABETHMrs. BreretonCHARLOTTEMrs. Wrighten[The AUTHOR was disappointed of a promised
Pro∣logue—The following was sketched the evening pre∣vious to
the representation of the Farce, but not spoken, on account of the length
of the several enter∣tertainments on that night.—It is printed, as an
explanation of the principal idea on which the plot was formed.]IN days of yore liv'd doughty Knights,Enchanters, 'Squires, and valiant Wights—Scamp'ring o'er mountains, seas, and land,Prompt at their haughty Fair's command.Castles were raz'd, and Giants kill'd,Volcanos sunk, or Rivers fill'd:No Ravisher dar'd stalk the earth;No faithless Lover turn'd to mirthThe oaths his fondness once had swore—Is he inconstant?—He's no more.Rare times were these! yet some there wereWho even then against the Fair,Fearless of Conj'rer, 'Squire, or Knight,Could shew their teeth, and vent their spight.These were your Learned Men—your Writers,Whom no age ever mark'd for Fighters;But war with Women they could wage,And fill their bold, satyric pageWith petty foibles—Ladies faults—Who still endure their rude assaults;For even now it is the way,In this our polish'd modern day,On Female Follies to be witty,From the Court Beauty to the City.Those who can't rhyme, in weighty ProseTheir whims and vanity expose:In Epigrams Sir Witling's folioMakes of the sex a perfect olio—Of noise, caprice, and pride, compos'd,To ev'ry thing outré dispos'd—Whilst Cards, and Dress, and studied
 Airs,More than good Housewifery, or Prayers,Engross their time, their hearts, their cares.Thus have they borne, from distant ages,The lash of Wit, the frown of Sages.—Sure then 'tis fair one hour to give—'Tis all she asks—a Woman leaveTo laugh at those same learned Men!The gall of whose sarcastic penBy Youth, and Beauty, is supply'd,Nor spares the Matron, Maid, nor Bride.If any from the musty Halls,Or the chill gloom of College-walls,To bask in Pleasure's tempting ray,Have Phaëton-like obtain'd a day,And, thron'd in yonder circle, sit,Deciding on the claims of Wit—Think not that you, our Author means,When thro' her saucy Farcic scenes,A Pedant she has dar'd to scanFrom Alma Mater—spick and span.No; in her name she bids me swearYou are chief fav'rites of the Fair—You've blood and spirits in your veins,And give—ge-heup—to joy the reins;Skim Life's sweet surface, and pursueThe flying blessings, still in view—For Pleasure ever on the beat,And roasted SQUARE CAPS—think a treat.WHO'S THE DUPE?ACT I.SCENE, the Park.Flower Girls, and several persons passing.First Girl.I Vow I ha'n't had a customer to-day. Summer is coming, and we
 shall be ruin'd. When flowers are plenty, no body will buy 'em.2d. Girl.Aye, wery true—people talks of summer; but for my part,
 give me Christmas. In a hard frost, or a deep snow, who's drest
 with∣out flowers and furs? Here's one of the Captains.Enter SANDFORD.Flowers, Sir!Sand.I have no silver.2d. Girl.Bless your Honour! I'll take gold.Sand.Indeed!2d. Girl.Here's hyacinths, and a sprig of myrtle.Sand.I'd rather have roses. What will you take for these? 
 [Pinching her cheek.]2d. Girl.I can't sell them alone—the tree and the roses must
 go together.Enter GRANGER.Sand.Ah! Granger, by all that's fortunate! I wrote to you last
 night in Devonshire, to hasten your return.Grang.Then your letter and I jostled each other at two o'clock, on
 this side Hounslow. My damn'd postillion—nodding, I suppose,
 over the charms of some Greasalinda—run against the letter-cart,
 tore off my hind wheel; and I was forced to mount his one-ey'd hack, and, in
 that curious equipage, arrived at three this morning.Sand.But how has the negotiation with your Brother ended? Will he put
 you in a situation to—Grang.Yes, to take a sweating with the Gentoos. He'll speak to Sir
 Jacob Jaghire to get me a commission in the East-Indies—"and, you know, every body grows rich
 there—and then you know you're a Soldier, you can fight." 
 [In a tone of mimickry.]Sand.Well, what answer did you give him?Grang.Yes, Sir Bobby, I can fight 
 [mimicking]; but I can't grow rich upon the
 smell of gun∣powder. Your true East-India Soldier is a dif∣ferent
 genius from those who strew'd Minden with Frenchmen, and must have as
 great a fe∣cundity of character, as a Dutch Burgomaster. Whilst his sword
 is in his hand, his pen must be in his cockade: he must be as expert at
 Frac∣tions, as at Assaults; to-day mowing down ranks of soft Beings,
 just risen from their Embroidery; to-morrow, selling Pepper and
 Beetle-nut—this hour a Son of Mars, striding over heaps of slain; the
 next, an Auctioneer—knocking down Chintz and Callico to the best
 bidder.Sand.And thus your negotiation ended?Grang.Except that I was obliged to listen to some very wise
 dissertation about running out, as he calls it. 
 "Five Thousand—enough for any younger
 Son, but the Prodigal." 
 [mimicking] Really, Sandford, I can't see
 how I could help it. Jack Spiller, to be sure, had Nine Hundred. The poor
 fellow was honest; but he married a Fine Lady, so died insolvent. I had a
 few more accidents of the same kind; my Captaincy cost a
 Thousand—and the necessary expences in America, with the
 distresses of my fellow Soldiers, have swallowed the rest.Sand.Poor Granger! So, with a spirit to do honour to Five
 Thousand a year, thou art not worth Five Shillings.Grang.C'est vrai. Should my affairs with Elizabeth be
 cross'd, I am the most undone Dog on earth.Sand.Now, tell me honestly, is it Elizabeth, or the fortune, which
 is your object?Grang.Why look'ee Sandford! I am not one of those sighing
 Milksops who could live in a cottage on love, or sit contentedly under a
 hedge, and help my wife to knit stockings; but, on the word of a Soldier, I
 had rather marry Elizabeth Doily with Ten Thousand Pounds, than any other
 woman on earth with an Hundred.Sand.And the woman must be very unreason∣able, who would not be
 satisfied with such a distinction. But do you know, that Elizabeth's
 Father has taken the liberty to chuse a Son-in-law without your
 permission?Grang.Ha! a Lover! That then is the secret my Charmer hinted, and
 which brought me so hastily to Town. Who—what is he?Sand.Every thing that you are not.Grang.There is such a mixture of jest and earnest—Sand.Upon my soul, 'tis confoundedly serious.—Since they
 became my neighbours in Suffolk, I am in the secrets of the whole family,
 and, for your sake, have cultivated an intimacy with Abraham Doiley,
 Citizen and Slop-Seller. In a word, the Father consults me, the Daughter
 complains to me, and the Cousin, fille-de∣chambre, romps with me—Can my
 importance be increased?Grang.My dear Sandford! 
 [impatiently.Sand.My dear Granger! the sum total is this: old Doily—bred,
 you know, in a Charity-school—swears he'll have a Man of LARNING for
 his Son. His caprice makes him regardless of fortune; but Elizabeth's
 husband must have Latin at his fingers' ends, and be able to teach his
 Grandsons to sputter in Greek.Grang.Oh! I'll study Hebrew, and write Odes in Chaldee, if that will
 content the old Gentleman—but, may I perish, if all the Pedants in
 England, with the Universities to back 'em, shall rob me of my
 Elizabeth!—See here 
 [producing a Letter]—an invitation, from her
 own dear hand.—This morning—this very hour—in a moment I
 shall be at her feet 
 [Going]—Go with me through the
 Park—Oh, no—I cry you mercy—You walk, but I fly.[Exit.Sand.Propitious be your flight!—Egad! there are two fine
 Girls—I'll try 'em—half afraid—the Women dress so
 equivocally, that one is in danger of attacking a Countess, when one only
 means to address a Nymph of King's-Place.[Exit.An Apartment at Mr. DOILEY's.Mr. and Miss DOILEY at Breakfast.Doil.Here, take away—take away. Re∣member, we are not at home
 to nobody but to Mr. Gradus.Serv.The formal Gentleman, that was here last night, Sir?Doil.Yes, 
 [snappishly] the Gentleman that was here
 last night. 
 [Exit Servant] What! I see you are resolved
 for to have poor Gradus's heart, Elizabeth!—I never saw you so
 trick'd out in a morning before. But he is n't none of your Chaps that's to be
 catch'd with a Mountain∣head, nor knots, nor gew-gaws.—No, no; you must
 mind your Ps and Qs with him, I can tell you. And don't laugh
 now when he's with you.—You've a confounded knack at laughing; and
 there's nothing so odious, in the eyes of a wise man, as a great
 laugher.Miss Doil.Oh! his very idea is as reviving as burnt feathers in
 hysterics.—I wish I had seen him last night, with all the rust
 of Oxford about him! he must have been the greatest provocative to
 mirth.Doil.How! what! a provokive to mirth! why, Hussey, he was
 recommended to me by an antikary Doctor of the Royal Society—he has
 finished his Larning some time; and they want him to come and drink and
 hunt in Shropshire—not he—he sticks to Al-mater; and the
 College-heads have been laid together many a time to know whether he shall be
 a great Judge, a larned Physician, or a Civility Doctor.Miss Doil.Nay then, Sir—if he's all this, laughing will be
 irresistible.Doil.Don't put me in a passion, Betty—don't go for to put
 me in a passion. What, would you have a Man with an eternal grin upon, his
 face, like the head of a knocker? and hopping and skipping about like a Dutch
 Doll, with quicksilver in its heels? If you must have a Husband of that
 sort, so be it, so be it—you know the rest.Miss Doil.Surely, Sir, 'tis possible for a Man who does not move as if
 cut in wood, or speak as though he delivered his words by tale, to have
 Breeding, and to—Doil.May be—may be; but your Man of Breeding is not fit for old
 Doiley's Son. What! shall I go for to give the labour of thirty years to a
 young Jackanapes, who'll come into the room with a Dancing-school
 step—and prate of his Grandfather Sir Thomas, his Great-Grand∣father
 the General, and his Great-great-great-Grandfather—merely because I
 can't tell whether I ever had one, or no?Miss Doil.I hope, Sir, that such a Man could never engage my—Doil.Pshaw, pshaw! you can't pretend for to judge of a
 Man; all Hypocrites and Deceivers.Miss Doil.Except Mr. Gradus.Doil.Oh, He! He's very different from your Men of Breeding, I
 assure you—The most ex∣traordinary Youth that was ever turn'd out
 of College. None of your Randans, up all night—not drinking and
 wenching—No—in his room—poring, and reading, and studying.
 Oh, the joy that I shall have in hearing him talk! I do love LARNING. I was
 grieved—grieved to the soul, Betty, when thou wert born. I had set my
 heart upon a Boy—and if thou'd'st been a Boy,  thou
 shouldst have had Greek, and Algebra, and Jometry enough for an
 Archbishop.Miss Doil.I am sorry—Doil.No, no; don't be sorry—be obedient, and all will be as
 it should be. You know I doat on you, you young Slut. I left Eastcheap for
 Westminster, on purpose to please you. Hav'n't I not carried you to
 Bath, Brimigem, and Warley-Common, and all the genteel places? I never grudge
 you no expence, nor no pleasure whatsomever.Miss Doil.Indeed, Sir, you are most indul∣gent.Doil.Well then, don't thwart me, Betty—don't go for to thwart
 me; that's all. Since you came into the world, and disappointed your Father
 of a Son, 'tis your duty to give him a wise Son-in-law to make up
 his loss.Enter CHARLOTTE.Char.Mrs. Taffety, the Mantua-maker, is in your dressing-room,
 Ma'am.Doil.Then send her away—She has'nt no time now for Mrs.
 Taffety.Miss Doil.Aye, send her away, Charlotte—what does she want? I
 didn't send for her.Char.Bless me—'tis the Captain. 
 [Apart.Miss Doil.Oh Heavens! 
 [aside] Yes, I do re∣member—aye, I
 did—I did send for her about the painted lutestring.Doil.Bid her come again to-morrow, I say.Char.Lord bless me! Sir, I dare say she can't come again
 to-morrow—such Mantua-makers as Mrs. Taffety won't wait half-a-dozen
 times on people—Why, Sir, she comes to her Customers 
  in a Chair of her own; and her Footman beats a tattoo at
 the door, as if she was a Countess.Doil.A Mantua-maker with her Footman and Chair! Oh lud! o lud! I
 should as soon have expected a Duchess in a Wheel-barrow.Miss Doil.Pray, Sir, allow me just to step and speak to her—It
 is the sweetest gown—and I'd give the world were you as much charm'd
 with it as I am.Doil.Coaxing slut! 
 [Exeunt Miss D. and
 Charlotte.]—Where the devil can Gradus be
 now?—Well, good fortune never comes in a hurry.—If I'd pitch'd upon
 your Man of Breeding, he'd have been here an hour ago—sipt his
 jock∣late, kiss'd Elizabeth's fingers, hopped into his carriage, and away to
 his wench—to divart her with charatures of the Old Fellow and his
 Daughter. Oh! before I'd give my gains to one of these Puppies, I'd spend
 'em all in building hospitals for lazy Lacquies, and decay'd Pimps.[Exit.SCENE, a Dressing-Room.Miss DOILEY and GRANGER.Miss Doil.A truce to your transports! Per∣haps I am too much inclined to
 believe all you can swear—but this must be a moment of
 bu∣siness—To secure me to yourself, are you will∣ing to enter
 into measures that—Gran.Any thing!—every thing!—I'll have a chaise at the
 Park-gate in five minutes; and we'll be in Scotland, my Elizabeth, before your
 new Lover has settled his first address.Miss Doil.Pho, pho! you're a mere bungler at contrivance; if you'll be
 guided by me, my  Father shall give me to you at St.
 James's Church, in the face of the world.Grang.Indeed!Miss Doil.Indeed.Grang.I fear to trust to it, my Angel!—Beauty can work
 miracles with all mankind, but an ob∣stinate Father.—Miss Doil.It is you who must work the mi∣racle.—I have
 settled the whole affair with my Cousin, who has understanding and
 wit—and you have only to be obedient.Grang.I am perfectly obedient—pray give me my lesson!Miss Doil.Why, luckily, you know my Fa∣ther has never seen you—he
 left Bath before you had the sauciness—Enter CHARLOTTE with a Bundle.Char.There!—you're finely caught!—Here's your Father and
 Mr. Gradus actually upon the stairs, coming here.Grang.Zounds! Where's the closet?Miss Doil.Oh Lord! here's no closet—I shall faint with
 terror.Grang.No back stairs?—No clothes-press?Char.Neither, neither!—But here—I'm your guardian
 angel— [untying the bundle]—I told 'em Mrs. Taffety
 was here; so without more cere∣mony clap on these—speak broken
 English, and, my life for it, you'll pass muster with my Uncle.Grang.What! make a Woman of me!—by Jupiter—Char.Lay your commands on him—if he doesn't submit, we are
 ruin'd.Miss Doil.Oh, you shall, I protest—here—I'll put his cap
 on.Doil.[without] This way, Sir—come this
 way—We'll take her by surprise—least prepara∣tion is
 best— [pulling at the door] Open the door!Miss Doil.Presently, Sir.Doil.[knocking] What the dickens are you do∣ing, I
 say?—open the door!Char.In a moment—I am only pinning my Cousin's
 gown—Lord bless me! you hurry one so, you have made me prick my
 finger. There—now you may enter.[Opens the door, and exit.]Doil.Oh! only my Daughter's Mantua-maker. Here, Elizabeth, this is
 that Mr. Gradus I talk'd to you about. Bless me! I hope you a'n't ill—you look as white as a candle.Miss Doil.No, Sir—not ill—but this woman has fretted me to
 death—she has spoil'd my gown.Doil.Why then make her pay for it, d'ye hear? It's my belief, if
 she was to pay for all she spoils, she'd soon drop her Chair, and
 trudge a-foot. Mr. Gradus—beg pardon—this is my
 Daughter—don't think the worse of her, because she's a little
 dash'd, or so.Grad.Bashfulness, Mr. Doiley, is the robe of Modesty—and
 Modesty, as hath been well ob∣serv'd, is a Sunbeam on a
 Diamond—giving force to its beauty, and exalting its lustre.Doil.He was a deep one, I warrant him, that said that—I
 remember something like it in the Wisdom of Solomon. Come, speak to
 Eliza∣beth there—I see she won't 'till you've broke the ice.Grad.Madam!— [bows]—hem—permit me—this
 honour—hem—believe me, Lady, I have more satisfaction in
 beholding you, than I should  have in conversing with
 Graevius and Grono∣vius. I had rather possess your approbation than that
 of the elder Scaliger; and this apartment is more precious to me, than was the
 Lycean Portico to the most zealous of the Peripatetics.Doil.There!—Shew me a Man of Breeding who could talk so! 
 [aside]Grang.Mon Dieu! Madame! is dis de Gen∣tilhomme for whom you
 vant de Bride Clothes?—He speak like a Dictionary-maker, and look like
 a Physician.Doil.Hold your tongue, Mrs. Skain of Silk! What, a dickens! must
 you put in your oar? Why don't you pack her off? 
 [to Miss Doiley.]Miss Doil.Pray make haste, Mrs. Taffety—How could you presume
 to speak? I believe all you have said to be very fine, Sir; but,
 unfor∣tunately, I don't know the Gentlemen you men∣tioned. The education given
 to Women shuts us entirely from such refined acquaintance.Gradus.Perfectly right, Madam, perfectly right. The more simple your
 education, the nearer you approach the pure manners of the purest ages. The
 charms of Women were never more powerful—never inspired such
 atchieve∣ments, as in those immortal periods, when they could neither read,
 nor write.Doil.Not read, nor write! Zounds, what a time was that for to bring
 up a Daughter! Why, a Peeress in those days did not cost so much as a
 Barber's Daughter in ours. Miss Friz must have her Dancing, her French, her
 Tambour, her Harpsicholl, her Jography, her Stronomy—whilst her
 Father, to support all this, lives upon Sprats; or, once in two years, calls
 his Credi∣tors to a composition.Grad.Oh, tempora mutantur! but these exu∣berances, Mr.
 Doiley, indigitate unbounded li∣berty.Doil.Digitate, or not—ifackens, if the Ladies would take my
 advice, they'd return to their distaffs, and grow notable—to
 distinguish themselves from their Shopkeepers Wives.Grad.Ah! It was at the Loom, and the Spin∣ning-wheel, that the
 Lucretias and Portias of the world imbibed their virtue; that the Mothers of
 the Gracchi, the Horatii, the Antonines, caught that sacred flame with which
 they inspired their Sons, and with the milk of their own pure bosoms gave
 them that fortitude, that magnani∣mity, which made them Conquerors and
 Kings.Grang.En vérité, Madame! if you marry dis
 Gentilhomme, he will make you spin his shirts, dat he may become de Fader
 of young Em∣perors.Doil.Hoity, toity! why, you impudent, in∣solent—Grang.Impudent! Pardie, Monsieur, he be only fit for un.
 Cocu. Vat, Monsieur! you marry un pretty Lady! You make good Doctor de
 Sorbonne—but Husband—Oh mon Dieu! de Men will
 rejoice—de Women will laugh—de Town will— [following Gradus, who retreats.Grad.Prithee, good Woman!—Mr. Doiley, I am really—Doil.In all my life I never saw so much. Why, you French Trollop!
 you, insolent, in∣significant, dirty—Grang.No French Trollop me, Monsieur! By gar, 'tis insult on my
 country—and mon Cousin de Friseur shall give you de challenge.DoilChallenge! what a dickens are ye com∣ing the mad Marquis over
 us? March, Madam! Troop, I say! It doesn't signify hanging back, Woman, for
 you shall out; 
 [exit Granger] and 
 [bawling after him] if ever I catch you at my door
 again, you and your Chair shall both be jirk'd in the kennel—This comes
 of employing your parler voos.Grad.Be not disconcerted, Mr. Doiley—Impertinence and wonder
 are the birthright of the ignorant.Enter a Servant.Serv.Sir, here's a Lord! Lord Pharo!!Doil.Lord Pharo! hum, then the four Aces run against him last
 night. Well, the ill luck of some, and the fine taste of others, makes my
 money breed like rabbits. 
 [Aside.Serv.Sir—Doil.Well, well, I'm coming—when a Lord wants money, he'll wait
 as patiently as any body. Well, Mr. Gradus, I'm your humble sarvant.
 Elizabeth!—you understand me.[Exit.Grad.How unlucky the old Gentleman should be called away! Hem! 
 [addressing him∣self to speak to her]
 There is something in her eye so sarcastic, I'd rather pronounce the
 Terrae∣filius, than address her. Madam!—What can I say? Oh,
 now—that's fortunate 
 [pulling out some papers] Hem! I will venture to
 request your ideas, Madam, on a little Autographon, which I design for the
 world.Miss Doil.—Sir!Grad.—In which I have formed a new Chro∣nometer, to prove that
 Confucius and Zoroaster were the same person;—and that the pyramids
  are not so ancient, by two hundred years, as the world
 believes.Miss Doil.To what purpose, Sir?Grad.Purpose!—Purpose, Madam! Why, really, Miss, our
 Booksellers shelves are loaded with volumes in the unfruitful road of plain
 sense and nature; and unless an Author can clance himself from the
 common track, he stands as little chance to be known as a Comet in its
 Aphelion. Pray, Ma'am, amuse yourself.Miss Doil.O Lord, Sir! you may as well offer me a sheet of
 Hieroglyphics—Besides, I hate reading.Grad.Hate reading!Miss Doil.Aye, to be sure; what's reading good for, but to give a
 stiff, embarrassed air? It makes a man move as if made by a Carpenter,
 who had forgot to give him joints— [observing him] he twirls his hat, and bites his
 thumb, whilst his hearers—his beholders, I mean, are gaping
 for his wit.Grad.The malicious creature! 'Tis my pic∣ture she has been drawing,
 and now 'tis more impossible for me to speak than ever.Miss Doil.For my part—for my part, if I was a Man, I'd study only
 Dancing, and Bon-Mots. With no other learning than these, he may be light and
 frolicksome as Lady Airy's Ponies—but loaded with Greek, Philosophy,
 and Mathematics, he's as heavy and dull as a Cart∣horse.Grad.Foemina cum voce Diaboli.Miss Doil.Bless me, Sir! why are you silent? My Father told me you was
 a Lover—I never saw such a Lover in my life. By this time you
 should have said fifty brilliant things—found an hundred similes
 for my Eyes, Complexion, and  Wit. Can your memory
 furnish you with no∣thing pat?—No Poetry—no Heroics? What
 sub∣ject did Portia's Lovers entertain her with, whilst she sat
 spinning—aye?Grad.The Lovers of that age, Madam, were ignorant of frothy
 compliments. Instead of be∣ing gallant, they were brave; instead of
 Flattery, they studied Virtue and Wisdom. It was these, Madam,
 that nerved the Roman arm; that em∣powered her to drag the nations of the world
 at her chariot-wheels, and that raised her to such an exalted
 height—Miss Doil.That down she tumbled in the dust—and there I beg
 you'll leave her. Was ever any thing so monstrous! I ask for a
 Compliment, and you begin an Oration—an oration on a par∣cel of stiff
 Warriors, and formal Pedants. Why, Sir, there is not one of these brave,
 wise, god∣like Men, but would appear as ridiculous in a Modern Assembly
 as a Judge in his long wig and a Maccaroni jacket.Grad.Now I am dumb again. Oh, that I had you at Brazen-nose,
 Madam!—I could manage you there. 
 [Aside.Miss Doil.What! now you're in the pouts, Sir? 'Tis mighty well. Bless
 us! what a life a Wife must have with such a Being! forever talk∣ing
 sentences, or else in profound silence. No delightful nonsense, no
 sweet trifling—all must be solemn, wise, and grave. Hang me if I
 would not sooner marry the Bust of Seneca, in bronze—then I should
 have all the gravity and coldness of Wisdom, without its impertinence.Grad.The impertinence of Wisdom!—Surely, Madam, or I am much
 deceived, you possess a mind capable—Miss Doil.Now I see, by the twist of your chin, Sir, you are beginning
 another Oration—but, I protest, I will never hear you speak again;
 'till you have forsworn those tones, and that manner. Go, Sir—throw
 your books into the fire, turn your study into a Dressing-room, hire a
 Dancing-master, and grow agreeable.[Exit.Grad.Plato! Aristotle! Zeno! I abjure ye. A Girl bred in a
 Nursery—in whose soul the sa∣cred lamp of knowledge hath
 scarcely shed its faintest rays—hath vanquish'd, and struck
 dumb, the most faithful of your disciples. 
 [Enter Char∣lotte.] Here's another
 She-devil—I'd as soon encounter a She-wolf. 
 [Going]Charl.Stay, Sir, pray, an instant! Laud bless me! am I such a
 scare-crow? I was never run from, by a young man, before in my life. 
 [Pulls him back.]Grad.I resolve henceforward to run from your whole
 sex—Youth and Beauty are only other names for Coquettry and
 Affectation. Let me go, Madam—you have beauty, and doubtless
 all that belongs to it.Charl.Lud! you've a mighty pretty whimsical way of
 complimenting.—Miss Doiley might have discerned something in you
 worth cherish∣ing, in spight of that husk of Scholarship.—To
 pass one's life with such a Being, seems to me the very Apex of human
 felicity. I found that word for him in a book of Geometry this morning. 
 [Aside.Grad.Indeed!Charl.Positively. I have listened to your con∣versation, and I
 can't help being concerned, that Talents which ought to do you honour,
 should,  by your mismanagement, be converted into
 downright ridicules.Grad.This Creature is of a genus quite dif∣ferent from the other. She
 has understanding! 
 [aside] I begin to suspect, Madam, that,
 tho' I have some knowledge, I have still much to learn.Charl.You have, indeed—Knowledge, as you manage it, is
 a downright Bore.Grad.Boar! What relation can there be between Knowledge and
 a Hog?Charl.Lord bless me! how ridiculous! You have spent your life in
 learning the dead lan∣guages, and are ignorant of the living—Why, Sir,
 Bore is all the Ton.Grad.Ton! ton! What may that be? It can∣not be Orthology: I
 don't recollect its root in the parent languages.Char.Ha! ha! ha! better and better. Why, Sir, Ton
 means—Ton is—Pho! what signifies where the root is?
 These kind of words are the short-hand of conversation, and convey whole
 sentences at once. All one likes is Ton, and all one hates is
 Bore.Grad.And is that divine medium, which pourtrays our minds, and marks
 us first in the animal climax—is speech become so
 arbitrary, that—Char.Divine medium!—Animal climax! 
 [contemptuously] You know very well, the use
 of language is to express one's likes and dislikes—and a Pig will do
 this as effectually by its squeak, or a Hen with her cackle, as you with your
 Latin and Greek.Grad.What can I say to you?Char.Nothing;—but yield yourself to my guidance, and you
 shall conquer Miss Doiley.Grad.Conquer her! she's so incased with ridicule,
 there is not a single vulnerable spot about her.Char.Pshaw, pshaw! What becomes of her ridicule, when
 you have banish'd your absurdi∣ties? One can no more exist without the
 other, than the mundane system without air. There's a touch of my science
 for you. 
 [Aside.Grad.Madam, I'll take you for my Minerva—Cover me with your
 shield, and lead me to battle.Char.Enough. In the first place, 
 [leading him to a glass] in the first place,
 don't you think you are habited à la mode d' Amour? Did you
 ever see a Cupid in a grizzle wig, curl'd as stiffly as Sir Cloudsley
 Shovel's in the Abbey?—A dingy brown coat, with vellum button-holes, to
 be sure, speaks an excellent taste; but then I would advise you to lay
 it by in lavender, for your Grandson's christening—and here's
 cambrick enough in your ruffles to make his shirt.Grad.I perceive my error. The votaries of Love commence a new
 childhood; and dignity would be as unbecoming in them, as a hornpipe to a
 Socrates—But habit is so strong, that, to gain an Empress, I could
 not assume that careless air, that promptness of
 expression—Char.Then you may give up the pursuit of Miss Doiley—for
 such a wise piece of uprightness would stand as good a chance
 to be Secretary to the Coterie, as her Husband.Grad.It is Mr. Doiley, who will—Char.Mr. Doiley! Ridiculous—Depend on't, he'll let her
 marry just whom she will—This  Mr. Gradus, says
 he—why I don't care a groat whether you marry him or no, says
 he—there are fifty young fellows at Oxford, who can talk Greek as well as
 he—Grad.Indeed!Char.I have heard a good account of the young man, says he. But all
 I ask of you is, to receive two visits from him—no more than
 two visits. If you don't like him—so; if you do, I'll give
 you half my fortune on the day of mar∣riage, and the rest at my death.Grad.What a singularity! to limit me to two
 visits—One is already past, and she hates me—What
 can I expect from the other?Char.Every thing. It is a moment that de∣cides the fate of a
 Lover. Now, fancy me Miss Doiley—look at me as if your soul was in
 your eyes—swear I'm a divinity—then take my hand and press
 it—thus.Grad.Heavens! her touch has thrill'd me.Char.And if I should pout, and resent the liberty, make your
 apology on my lips. 
 [Gradus catches her in his arms, and kisses
 her] So, so! you have fire, I perceive.Grad.Can you give me any more lessons?Char.Yes; but this is not the place. I have a friend—Mr.
 Sandford, whom you saw here last night—you shall dine with him; he
 will initiate ye at once in the fashionable rage, and teach you to trifle
 agreeably. You shall be equipp'd from his wardrobe, to appear here in the
 evening a Man of the World—Adieu to Grizzles, and—Grad.But what will the Father think of such a metamorphosis?Char.Study your Mistress only—your visit will be
 to her, and that visit decides your fate. 
 Resolve then to take up your new character boldly—in all its
 strongest lines, or give up one of the richest Heiresses in the
 kingdom.Grad.My obligations, Madam—Char.Don't stay now, to run the risk of meet∣ing Mr.
 Doiley—for, if he should discover that you've disgusted his
 Daughter, Sandford, the dinner, and the plot, will be worth no more than your
 gravity. Away! I'll meet you at Story's Gate to introduce you.[Exit Gradus.Enter Miss DOILEY.Miss Doil.Excellent Charlotte! you've out-gone my expectation—Did
 ever a woodcock run so blindly into a snare?Char.Oh, that's the way of all your great Scholars—take 'em but
 an inch out of their road, and you may turn 'em inside out, as easily as
 your glove.Miss Doil.Well, but have you seen Sand∣ford?—Is every thing in
 train?—Will Gradus be hoodwink'd?Char.Hoodwink'd! Why, don't you see he's already stark blind? or
 if he has any eyes, I as∣sure ye they are all for me.Miss Doil.My heart palpitates with appre∣hension—we shall never
 succeed.Char.Oh, I'll answer for the Scholar, if you'll undertake the
 Soldier. Mr. Sandford has en∣gaged half a dozen of the Savoir vivres;
 all in high spirits at the idea of tricking old Leather-purse—and
 they have sworn to exhaust wit and invention, to turn our Solon out of
 their hands a finish'd Coxcomb.Miss Doil.Blessing on their labours! My Granger is gone to study his
 rival; and will make, I hope, a tolerable copy.—Now follow Gradus, my
 dear Charlotte, and take care they give him just champagne enough to
 raise him to the point, without turning over it.Exeunt.END OF THE FIRST ACT.ACT II.SCENE, An Apartment.DOILEY asleep. A Table before him, with Bottles,
&c.Enter a SERVANT.Servant.SIR! Sir! 
 [jogging him] Sir! What a pise! sure my
 Master has drain'd the bottles, he sleeps so found.—Oh, no— [pours out a glass]—Here's t'ye, old
 Gentleman! can't think why they sent me to wake thee—am sure the
 house is al∣ways quietest when you're a snoring.— [Drinks; then awakens him.]Doil,Hey!—how!—what! Is Mr. Gradus come?Serv.No, Sir—but Mr. Sandford's above stairs, and a mortal
 fine Gentleman.Doil.Fine Gentleman!—aye—some Rake, I suppose, that
 wants to sell an annuity—I wonder where Gradus is—Past seven.
 
 [Looking at his watch.]Serv.His friends keep the gentleman over a bottle, mayhap, Sir,
 longer than he thought for.Doil.He over a bottle!—more liker he's over some
 crabbed book—or watching what the Moon's about, through a Microscope.
 Come, move the things; and empty them two bottoms into one bottle, and cork it
 up close—d'ye hear?—I wish Gradus was come—Well, if I
 succeed in this one point, the devil may run away with the rest. Let the
 world go to loggerheads; grass grow upon 'Change; land-tax mount up; little
 Doiley is snug. Doiley, with a Hundred Thousand in annuities, and a
 Son-in-law as wise as a Chancellor, may bid defiance to wind and weather.[Exit.SCENE, a Drawing-Room.Enter GRADUS, led by CHARLOTTE, and followed by Mr.
SANDFORD.Charlotte.Well, I protest this is an improve∣ment!—Why, what with
 sattins and tassels, and spangles and foils, you look as fine as a
 Chymist's shop by candle-light.Grad.Madam, do you approve—Charl.Oh, amazingly—I'll run and send Miss Doiley to admire
 you.Grad.[looking in a glass.] Oh, if our Proctor could
 now behold me! he would never believe that figure to be Jeremy Gradus.Sand.Very true—and I give ye joy. No one would conceive you'd
 ever been within gun-shot of a College.Grad.What must I do with this?Sand.Your chapeau bras—wear it thus. These hats are
 for the arm only.Grad.A hat for the arm! what a subversion of ideas! Oh, Mr.
 Sandford—if the sumptuary laws of Lycurgus—Sand.Damn it! will you never leave off your College cant! I tell you
 once more—and, by Jupiter, if you don't attend to me, I'll give you
 up—I say, you must forget that such fellows ever
 existed—that there was ever a language but English—a
 classic but Ovid, or a volume but his Art of Love.Grad.I will endeavour to form myself from your
 instructions—but tarry with me, I entreat you—if you should
 leave me—Sand.I won't leave you. Here's your Mistress—Now, Gradus,
 stand to your arms.Grad.I'll do my best—but I could wish the Purse-keeper
 was Miss Charlotte.Enter Miss DOILEY.Sand.Hush! Your devoted. Allow me, Madam, to introduce a Gentleman
 to you, in whose affairs I am particularly interested—Mr.
 Gradus.Miss Doil.Mr. Gradus! Is it possible?Grad.Be not astonished, oh lovely Maiden, at my sudden change!
 Beauty is a talisman which works true miracles, and, without a fable,
 transforms mankind.Miss Doil.Your transformation, I fear, is too sudden to be
 lasting—Grad.Transformation! Resplendent Virgo! brightest constellation
 of the starry Zone! I am but now created. Your charms, like the
 Pro∣methean fire, have warmed the clod to life, and rapt me to a new
 existence.Miss Doil.But may I be sure you'll never take up your old rust
 again?Grad.Never. Sooner shall Taurus with the Pisces join, Copernicus
 to Ptolemy resign the spheres, than I be what I was.Miss Doil.I shall burst. 
 [Walking aside]Sand.Well, you've hit it off tolerably, for a coup
 d'essai—But prithee, Gradus, can't you talk in a style a
 little less fustain? You remember how those Fine Fellows convers'd, you
 saw at dinner—no sentences, no cramp words—all was Ease, and
 Impudence.Grad.Yes, I remember. Now the shell is burst, I shall soon be
 fledged. 
 [Doiley coming in, starts back.]Doil.Why, who the dickens have we here!Sand.So—there's the old Genius!Miss Doil.But I am convinced now—I am sure all this is put
 on—in your heart you are still Mr. Gradus.Grad.Yes, Madam, still Gradus; but not that stiff, scholastic
 Fool you saw this morning—No, no—I have learn'd that the
 acquisitions of which your Father is so ridiculously fond, are
 useless lumber—that a man who knows more than his neighbours, is in
 danger of being shut out of society—or, at best, of being invited
 at dinner once in a twelvemonth, to be exhibited like an antique
 Bronze—or Porridge-pot from Herculaneum.Doil.Zounds! 'tis he! I'm all over in a cold sweat. 
 [Behind]Miss Doil.And don't you think Learning the greatest blessing in the
 world?Grad.Not I, truly, Madam—Learning! a vile Bore!Doil.Do I stand upon my head, or my heels?Grad.I shall leave all those fopperies to the Grey-beards at
 College—let 'em chop logic, or make English hashes out of stale
 Hebrew, 'till they starve, for me.Sand.This is your resolution?Grad.Fix'd as Ixion on his wheel—I have no study now but the
 Ton.Doil.Indeed!Grad.You shall confess, my Friend, in spite of prejudice, that
 'tis possible for a Man of Letters to become a Man of the World. You
 shall see, that he can dress, grow an adept in the science of Taste,
 ogle at the Opera, be voci∣ferous at the Playhouse, suffer himself to be
 pigeon'd with an easy air at Boodle's, and lose his health for the benefit
 of his reputation in King's Place.Miss Doil.Bless me! one would suppose you had been familiar in the
 Bon-ton all your life—you have all the requisites to make a
 figure in it, by heart.Grad.The mere force of Beauty, Madam—I wish'd to become
 worthy of you, and that wish has work'd a miracle.Doil.A miracle with a vengeance! Jacquet Droz' wood and wire-work was
 nothing to it.Miss Doil.How different from what you was this morning!Grad.Oh, mention it not—this morning!—  may it be blotted from Time's Ledger, and never thought on
 more! I abhor my former Self, Madam, more than you can—witness now the
 recantation of my errors. Learning, with all its tribe of solemn fopperies, I
 abjure—ab∣jure for ever.Doil.You do?Grad.The study of what is vulgarly called Philosophy may suit a
 Monk; but 'tis as unbe∣coming a Gentleman, as Loaded Dice, or a Brass∣hilted
 Sword.Doil.Larning unbecoming a Gentleman!—Very well.Grad.Hebrew I leave to the Jew Rabbies, Greek to the Bench of
 Bishops, Latin to the Apothecaries, and Astronomy to Almanack-makers.Doil.Better, and better.Grad.The Mathematics—Mixed, Pure, Speculative, and Practical,
 with their whole circle of Sciences, I consign, in a lump, to Old Men who
 want Blood, and to Young ones who want Bread—and now you've heard my
 whole abjuration.DOILEY rushing forward.Doil.Yes—and I have heard too—I have
 heard. Oh, that I should ever have been such a dolt as to take thee for a
 Man of Larning!Grad.Mr. Doiley! 
 [Confounded.]Doil.What! don't be dash'd, Man—go on with your objurations,
 do. Yes, you'll make a shine in the Tone!—Oh, that ever I should have
 been such a Nincompoop!Sand.My dear Mr. Doiley, don't be in a heat—how can a Man of
 your discernment—now look at Gradus—I am sure he's a much 
  prettier fellow than he was—his figure and his
 manner are quite different things.Doil.Yes, yes, I can see that—I can see that—Why, he
 has turned little Easop upside down—he's the Lion in the skin of an
 Ass.[Walking about]Grad.I must retrieve myself in his opinion. The skin,
 Mr. Doiley, may be put off; and be assured, that the mind, which has once
 felt the sacred energies of Wisdom, tho' it may assume, for a
 moment—Miss Doil.So! so! 
 [Angrily]Sand.[Apart] Hark ye, Sir! that won't do. By Heaven, if
 you play retrograde, I'll forsake you on the spot. You are ruined with your
 Mistress in a moment.Grad.Dear Madam! believe me, that as for—what can I
 say—how assimilate myself to two such opposite tastes? I
 stand reeling between two characters, like a Substantive between two
 Ad∣jectives.Doil.You! you for to turn Fop, and Mac∣caroni! Why, 'twould be as
 nateral for a Jew Robin to turn Parson. An Elephant in pinners—a
 Bishop with a rattle and bells, couldn't be more posterous.Sand.Nay now, my dear Mr. Doiley—Doil.Dear me no dears. Why, if I wanted a Maccaroni, I might have had
 choice—every alley from Hyde-Park to Shadwell-Dock swarms with
 'em—genuine; and d'ye think I'll have an amphiberous
 thing—half-and-half, like the Sea-calf at Sir Ashton's?Sand.Oh, if that's all, an hundred to ten, Gradus will soon be as
 complete a character, as  if he had never learnt his Alpha
 Beta; or known more of the Classics than their names.Doil.Oh, I warrant him. Now what do ye think of the
 Scratchi, the Horsi, and the rest of 'em? aye!Grad.Oh, a mere Bore—a parcel of brawny untaught
 fellows, who knew no more of life than they did of Chinese. If they'd stood
 Candidates for rank in a College of Taste, they'd have been returned
 ignorantur—would they not, Madam?Miss Doil.Oh certainly—I could kiss the fellow, he has entered
 into my plot with such spirit.[Exit.Doil.Why, you've been in wonderful haste to get rid of the igranter
 part—but as it hap∣pened, that was the only part I car'd for—so
 now you may carry your hogs to another market; they won't not do for me.Grad.My Hogs!Doil.Aye—your Boars—your improvements—your
 fashionable airs—your—in short, you are not the Man I took you
 for; so you may trot back to College again—go, Mister, and teach 'em
 the Tone, do—Lord, how they'll stare! Je∣remy Gradus, or the Monkey
 return'd from travel.Sand.Upon my honour, you are too severe. Leave us, Man—leave
 us—I'll settle your affair, I warrant. 
 [to Gradus.Grad.No so easily, I fear—he sticks to his point, like a
 rusty Weather-cock—All my de∣pendence is on the Lady.Sand.You'll allow Gradus to speak to Miss Doiley.Doil.Oh, aye, to be sure—the more he speaks, the
 less she'll like him. Here—shew  Mr. Gradus to
 the dressing-room 
 [Exit Gradus]. Give her another
 dose—surfeit her by all means. Why, sure, Mr. Sandford, you'd no
 hand in transmogrifying the—Sand.Yes, faith, I had—I couldn't endure the idea of seeing
 your charming Daughter tied to a collection of Greek Apophthegms and Latin
 Quotations—so I endeavoured to English him.Doil.English him! I take it shocking ill of you, Mr.
 Sandford—that I must tell you.—Here are all my hopes gone, like a
 whiff of Tobacco!Sand.Pho! my dear Mr. Doiley, this at∣tachment of yours to
 Scholarship is a mere whim—Doil.Whim! well, suppose it is—I will have my whim. Work'd
 hard forty years, and saved above twice as many Thousand Pounds—and
 if so much labour, and so much money, won't entitle a Man to whim, I don't
 know what the devil should.Sand.Nor I neither, I'm sure.Doil.To tell ye a bit of a secret—lack o' Larning has been my
 great detriment. If I'd been a Scholar, there's no knowing what I might have
 got—my Plumb might have been two—my—Sand.Why, doubtless, a little Classical know∣ledge might have
 been of use, in driving your Bargains.Doil.Aye, to be sure!—and I do verily be∣lieve it hindered me
 from being Lord Mayor—only think of that—Lord Mayor of London!Sand.How so?Doil.Why, I tended the Common Council, and all the Parish-meetings,
 for fifteen years, without daring for to make one arangue—at last 
  a Westry was call'd, about chusing of a Turncock. So,
 now, thinks I, I'll shew 'em what I'm good for—our Alderman was in the
 Purples—so, thinks I, if he tips off, why not I, as well as
 another?—so I'll make a speech about Patrots, and then ax for their
 votes.Sand.Very judicious!Doil.If you'll believe me, I got up three times—Silence! says
 Mr. Crier—and my tongue grew so dry with fright, that I couldn't wag
 it—so I was forc'd to squat down again, 'midst
 horse-laughs—and they nick-named me Dummy, through the whole
 Ward.Sand.Wicked Rogues! Well, I ask your par∣don—I had no idea of
 these important reasons, Yet, how Men differ! Now the Family of
 Sir Wilford Granger are quite distress'd by the ob∣stinate attachment to
 the Sciences, which has quite spoil'd that fine young Fellow I told you of
 this morning.Doil.Aye! What's he Sir Wilford Granger's Son? Knew his Father very
 well—kept a fine Study of horses, and lost many Thousands by
 it—lent him money many a time—good Man—always punctual.Sand.Aye, Sir! but this Youth disappointed all his hopes. Mighty
 pleasant, to see a young Fellow—form'd to possess life in all
 its points, and bewitching varieties—shrink from the World, and bury
 himself amidst obsolete Books, Systems, and Schisms—whilst
 Pleasure wooes him to her soft embrace, and joys sollicit him in
 vain!—Oh, it gave his Father great trouble.Doil.Great trouble! Dear me, dear me! I always thought Sir Wilford
 had been a wiser  man—why, I would have
 given the world for such a Son.Sand.He swallows it rarely![aside.]—Oh, he piques himself on such
 trifles as reading the Greek and Latin Authors in their own tongue, and
 mastering all the quibbles of our English Philosophers—Doil.English Philosophers! I wou'd'nt give a farthing for
 them.Sand.Why, sure you have heard of a Bacon, a Locke, a
 Newton—Doil.Newton! oh aye—I have heard of Sir Isaac—every
 body has heard of Sir Isaac—Great Man—Master of the Mint.Sand.Oh, Sir! this Youth has found a dozen mistakes in his
 theories, and proved him wrong in one or two of his calculations—in
 short, he is advised to give the world a system of his own—in
 which, for aught I know, he'll prove the earth to be concave instead of
 spherical, and the moon to be no bigger than a punch-bowl.Doil.[Aside] He's the Man—he's the Man!—Look'ee. Mr. Sandford—you've given a descrip∣tion of this young Fellow,
 that's set my blood in a ferment. Do you—now, my dear Friend,
 do you think now that you could prevail upon him to marry my
 Daughter?Sand.Why, I don't know—neither beauty nor gold has charms for
 him. Knowledge—knowledge is his Mistress.Doil.Aye! I'm sorry for that—and yet I'm glad of it too. Now,
 see what ye can do with him—see what ye can do with him!Sand.Well, well, I'll try. He promis'd to call on me here this
 evening, in his way to the  Museum—I don't know
 whether he is'nt below now.Doil.Below now! Isackins, that's lucky—hang me if
 it is'nt! Do go and—and speak to him a bit—and bring him
 up—bring him up. Tell him, if he'll marry Elizabeth, I'll give
 him, that is, I'll leave him every farthing I have in the world.Sand.Well—since you are so very earnest, I'll see what
 I can do.[Exit.Doil.Thank'ee, thank'ee! Icod! I'll buy him twice as many books as a
 College Library, but what I'll bribe him—that I will. What the dickens
 can Elizabeth be about, with that thing there! that Gradus!—He a Man of
 Larning!—Hang me if I don't believe his head's as hollow as my Cane.
 Shure she can't have taken a fancy to the smattering Monkey! Ho, there they
 are—here he comes! Why there's Greek and Alge∣bra in his face.Enter SANDFORD, and GRANGER dressed in black.Mr. Granger, your very humble sarvant, Sir—I'm very
 glad to see you, Sir.Grang.I thank you, Sir. 
 [Very solemnly.]Doil.I knew your Father, Sir, as well as a Beggar knows his Dish.
 Mayhap Mr. Sandford told you that I wanted for to bring you and my Daughter
 acquainted—I'll go and call her in.Grang.'Tis unnecessary.Doil.He seems a mighty silent Man. 
 Apart, to Sandford.Sand.Studying—studying. Ten to one he's forming a
 discourse in Arabic, or revolving one of Euclid's problems.Doil.Couldn't you set him a talking a bit? I long for to hear him
 talk.Sand.Come, Man! forget the old Sages a moment—Can't the idea of
 Miss Doiley give a fillip to your imagination?Grang.Miss Doiley, I am inform'd, is lovely as a Woman can
 be—But what is Woman?—only one of Nature's agreeable blunders.Doil.Hum! That smacks of something! 
 [Aside.] Why, as to that, Mr. Granger, a Wo∣man
 with no potion but her whims, might be but a kind of a Jew's bargain—but
 when Fifty Thou∣sand is popt into the Scale, she must be bad indeed if
 her Husband doesn't find her a Pen'worth.Grang.With Men of the World, Mr. Doiley, Fifty Thousand Pounds might
 have their weight; but, in the balance of Philosophy, gold is light as
 phlogisticated air.Doil.That's deep—I can make nothing of it—that must be
 deep. 
 [aside.] Mr. Granger! the great account I have
 heard of your Larning, and what not, has made me willing for to be a-kin to
 you.Grang.Mr. Sandford suggested to me your design, Sir—and,
 as you have so nobly proposed your Daughter, as the prize of Learning, I
 have an ambition to be related to you.Doil.[Aside] But I'll see a bit farther into him,
 though, first. Now pray, Mr. Granger! pray now—a—I say— [To Sand.] Ax him some deep question,
 that he may shew himself a bit.Sand.What the devil shall I say? Granger! is it your opinion that
 the ancient Antipodes walk'd erect, or crawl'd on all four?Grang.A thinking man always doubts—but the best informations
 concur, that they were Quadrupedes during two revolutions of the Sun, and
 Bipedes ever after.Doil.Quadpedes! Bipedes! what a fine Man he is! 
 [Aside.Sand.A surprising transformation!Grang.Not more surprising than the trans∣formation of an Eruca
 to a Chrysalis—a Chrysalis to a Nymph, and a Nymph to a
 Butterfly.Doil.There again! I see it will do—I see it will
 do—aye, that I will—hang me if I don't.[Aside.[Exit, chuckling and laughing.Grang.What's he gone off for, so abruptly?Sand.For his Daughter, I hope—Give ye joy, my dear fellow! the
 Nymph, the Eruca, and the Chrysalis, have won the day.Grang.How shall I bound my happiness? My dear Sandford—that
 was the luckiest question, about the Antipodes!Sand.Yes—pretty successful. Have you been at your
 studies?Grang.Oh, I've been in the Dictionary this half-hour—and have
 pick'd up cramp words enough to puzzle and delight the Old Gentle∣man the
 remainder of his life.Sand.Here he is, faith—Grang.And Elizabeth with him—I hear her dear footsteps! Oh,
 how shall I—Doil.without. Come along, I say—what a plague are ye so modest
 for? Come in here. 
 [Pulls in Gradus by the arm.] Here, I've
 brought him—one of your own kidney—ha! ha! ha! Now I'll lay a
 gallon you can't guess what I've brought him for. I've brought him—ha!
 ha! ha! —for to pit him against you 
 [to Granger] to see which of you two is
 the most larned—ha! ha!Grang.Ten thousand Devils, Plagues, and Furies!Sand.Here's a blow-up!Doil.Why, for all he looks so like a Nin∣compoop in this pye-pick'd
 jacket, he's got his noddle full of Greek, and Algebra, and them things. Why,
 Gradus, don't stand aloof, Man—this is a Brother Scholar, I tell
 ye.Grad.A Scholar! all who have earn'd that distinction, are
 my Brethren. Carissime frater, gaudeo te videre.Grang.Sir—you—I—most obedient. I wish thou wert
 in the bottom of the Red Sea, and the largest folio in thy library about thy
 neck. 
 [Aside.Sand.For Heaven's sake, Mr. Doiley, what do you mean?Doil.Mean! why, I mean for to pit 'em, to be sure—and to give
 Elizabeth to the winner. Touch him up—touch him up! 
 [to Grang.] shew him what a fool he
 is.Sand.Why, sure, you won't set them together by the ears!Doil.No, no—but I'm resolved for to set 'em together by the
 tongues. To cut the business short—Mr. Gradus! you are, to be
 sure, a great dab at Larning, and what not; but I'll bet my Daughter, and
 Fifty Thousand to boot, that Granger beats ye—and he that wins, shall
 have her.Grang.Heavens! what a stake! 'Tis suffi∣cient to inspire a dolt
 with the tongues of Babel.Sand.My dear Friend, think of the inde∣licacy—Doil.Fiddle-de-dee!—I tell you, I will have my whim—and
 so, Gradus, set off. By Jenkins, you'll find it a tough business to
 beat Granger—he's one of your great Genis Men—going to write a
 book about Sir Isaac, and the Moon, and the Devil knows what.[Miss Doil. and Charl. enter at the back
 of the stage.Grad.If so, the more glorious will be my victory. Come, Sir! let us
 enter the lists, since it must be so, for this charming prize 
 [pointing to Miss Doiley.] Chuse your
 weapons—Hebrew—Greek—Latin—or English. Name your
 subject; we will pursue it syllogistically, or socratically, as you
 please.Grang.[aside] Curse your Syllogisms, and
 Socraticisms!Doil.No, no, I'll not have no English—What a plague! every
 Shoe-black jabbers English—so give us a touch of Greek to set off
 with—Come, Gradus, you begin.Miss Doil.Undone! undone!Grad.If it is merely a recitation of Greek that you want, you shall
 be gratified. An epi∣gram that occurs to me, will give you an idea of that
 sublime language.Charl.[aside] Oh, confound your sublime
 language!Grad.Panta gelos, kai panta konis, kai panta to medenPanta gar exalagon, esti ta ginomena.Doil.Panta, tri pantry! Why, that's all about the Pantry.
 What, the old Grecians lov'd Tid∣bits, may hap—but that's low! aye,
 Sandford!Sand.Oh, cursed low! he might as well have talk'd about a
 Pig-stye.Doil.Come, Granger, now for it! Elizabeth and Fifty Thousand
 Pounds!Grang.Yes, Sir. I—I—am not much pre∣pared—I could
 wish—I could wish—Sandford! 
 [Apart.Sand.Zounds! say something—any thing!Char.[Aside.] Eigh! it's all over. He could as
 easily furnish the Ways and Means, as a word in Greek.Doil.Hoity, toity! What, at a stand! Why sure you can talk Greek
 as well as Gradus?Grang.'Tis a point I cannot decide—you must
 determine it. Now, Impudence, embrace me with thy seven-fold shield!
 Zanthus, I re∣member, in describing such a night as this—Grad.Zanthus! you surely err. I remem∣ber but one being of that
 name, and he was a Horse.Grang.Sir, he was an Orator—and such an one that,
 Homer records, the Gods themselves in∣spired him.Grad.True, Sir,—but you wo'n't deny—Doil.Come—come! I sha'n't have no brow-beating—nobody
 offer'd for to contradict you—So begin 
 [to Granger.] What said Orator Zan∣thus?Grang.Yon lucid orb, in aether pensile, irra∣diates th'expanse.
 Refulgent scintillations, in th'ambient void opake, emit humid splendor.
 Chrysalic spheroids th'horizon vivify—astifarious constellations,
 nocturnal sporades, in refrange∣rated radii, illume our orb terrene.Miss Doil.I breathe again! 
 [Aside.Doil.There! there!—Well spoke, Granger!—Now, Gradus,
 beat that!Grad.I am enrapt in astonishment! You are imposed on,
 Sir—instead of classical language, you have heard a rant in
 English—Doil.English! Zounds! d'ye take me for a fool? D'ye think I don't
 know my own Mother-tongue!—'Twas no more like English, than I am like
 Whittington's Cat.Grad.It was every syllable English.Doil.There's impudence!—There was'nt a word of it
 English—If you take that for English, devil take me if I believe
 there was a word of Greek in all your tri pantrys.Grad.Oh! the torture of Ignorance!Doil.Ignorant!—Come, come, none of your tricks upon travellers.
 I thought you meant all that as a skit upon my edication—but I'll have
 you to know, Sir, that I'll read the Tenth Chap∣ter of Nehemiah with you for
 your ears.Grad.I repeat, that you are imposed on. Mr. Sandford, I appeal to
 you.Grang.And I appeal—Sand.Nay, Gentlemen, Mr. Doiley is your Judge in all disputes
 concerning the Vulgar Tongue.Doil.Aye, to be sure, I am. Who cares for your Peals? I peal too;
 and I tell you, I wo'n't be imposed on. Here, Elizabeth—I have got ye a
 Husband, at last, to my heart's content—Miss Doil.Him, Sir! You presented that Gentleman to me this morning, and
 I have found such a fund of merit in him—Doil.In he! what in that Beau-bookworm! that argufies me down, I
 don't know English?  Don't go for to provoke me—bid
 that Mr. Granger welcome to my house—he'll soon be Master on't.Miss Doil.Sir, in obedience to the com∣mands of my Father— [significantly.]Doil.Sha'n't say Obedience—say something kind to him of
 yourself—He's a Man after my own heart.Miss Doil.Then, Sir, without reserve, I ac∣knowledge your choice of Mr.
 Granger is per∣fectly agreeable to mine.Doil.That's my dear Bet!— [kissing her]—We'll have the wedding
 directly. There! d'ye understand that, Mr. Tri-Pantry?—is
 that English?Grad.Yes, so plain, that it has exsuscitated my
 understanding—I perceive I have been dup'd.Doil.Aye, well! I had rather you should be the Dupe than me.Grad.Well, Sir, I have no inclination to contest—if the
 lovely Charlotte will perform her promise.Char.Agreed! provided that, in your cha∣racter of Husband, you will
 be as singular and old-fashion'd as the Wig you wore this morn∣ing.Doil.What, Cousin! have you taken a fancy to the Scholar?
 Egad! you're a cute Girl, and mayhap may be able to make something of him—and I don't care if I throw in a few Hundreds, that you mayn't repent
 your Bargain. Well, now I've settled this affair exactly to my own mind, I am
 the happiest man in the world—And, d'ye hear, Gradus?—I don't
 love for to  bear malice- If you'll trot back to
 College, and larn the difference between Greek and English, why you may
 stand a chance to be Tutor—when they've made me a Grandfather.Grad.I have had enough of languages. You see I have just engaged
 a Tutor to teach me to read the World; and if I play my part there as well as I
 did at Brazen-Nose, your indulgence will grant me applause.THE END.