SOBER ADVICE FROM HORACE, TO THE Young GENTLEMEN about Town.As deliver'd in his SECOND SERMON.Imitated in the Manner of Mr. POPE.Together with the ORIGINAL TEXT, as  by the Revd. R. BENTLEY, Doctor of Divinity. And some Remarks on the VERSION.LONDON: Printed for T. Boreman, at the Cock on Ludgate-Hill; and sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. [Price One Shilling.]TO ALEXANDER POPE,EsqSIR,I Have so great a Trust in your Indulgence toward me, as to believe you cannot but Patronize this Imitation, so much in your own Manner, and whose Birth I may truly say is owing to you. In that Confidence, I would not suppress the Criticisms made upon it by the Reverend Doctor, the rather, since he has promised to mend the Faults in the next Edition, with the same Goodness he has practised to Milton. I hope you will believe that while I express my Regard for you, it is only out of Modesty I conceal my Name; since, tho' perhaps, I may not profess myself your Admirer so much as some others, I cannot but be, with as much inward Respect, Good-will, and Zeal as any Man,Dear Sir,Your most Affectionate AND Faithful Servant.Q. HORATII FLACCISERMO II. L. I.TEXTUM Recensuit V. R. RICARDUS BENTLEIUS, S.T.P. [NOTAE BENTLEIANAE.] Imitated. Why Imitated? Why not translated? Odi Imitatores! A Metaphrast had not turned Tigellius, and Fusidius, Malchinus and Gargonius (for I say Malchinus, not Malthinus, and Gargonius, not Gorgonius) into so many LADIES. Benignus, hic, hunc, &c. all of the Masculine Gender: Every School-boy knows more than our Imitator.AMbubajarum collegia, pharmacopolae,Mendici, mimae, balatrones; hoc genus omneMaestum ac sollicitum est cantoris morte Tigelli:Quippe Benignus erat——Contra hic, ne prodigus esseDicatur, metuens, inopi dare nolit amico,Frigus quo duramque famem depellere possit.Hunc si perconteris, avi cur atque parentisPraeclaram ingrata seringat malus ingluvie rem,Omnia conductis coemens obsonia nummis:"Sordidus, atque animi quod parvi nolit haberi,"Respondet. laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis.Fufidius vappae famam timet ac nebulonis,Dives agris, dives positis in fenore nummis.Quinas hic capiti mercedes exsecat; atqueQuanto perditior quisque est, tanto acrius urguet.Nomina sectatur, modo sumta veste viriliSub patribus duris, tironum. Maxime, quis non,Juppiter, exclamat, simul atque audivit? "At in se"Pro quaestu sumtum facit hic". Vix credere possisQuam sibi non sit amicus: ita ut Pater ille, TerentiFabula quem miserum gnato vixisse fugatoInducit, non se pejus cruciaverit atque hic.Si quis nunc quaerat, Quo res haec pertinet? Illuc:Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt.Malchinus tunicis demissis ambulat: est quiInguen ad obscaenum subductis usque facetus:Pastillos Rufillus olet, Gargonius hircum.Nil medium est. sunt qui nolint tetigisse, nisi illas,Quarum subsuta talos tegat instita veste:Contra alius nullam, nisi olente in fornice stantem.Quidam notus homo cum exiret fornice; "Macte"Virtute esto, inquit sententia dia Catonis,"Nam simul ac venas inflavit tetra libido,"Huc juvenes aequum est descendere, non alienas"Permolere uxores.——Nolim laudarier, inquit,Sic me, mirator CUNNI CUPIENNIUS ALBI CUNNI CUPIENNIUS ALBI, Hoary Shrine. Here the Imitator grievously errs, Cunnus albus by no means signifying a white or grey Thing, but a Thing under a white or grey Garment, which thing may be either black, brown, red, or parti-coloured. BENT.Audire est operae pretium, procedere recteQui moechos non voltis, ut omni parte laborent;Utque illis multo corrupta dolore voluptas,Atque haec rara, cadat dura inter saepe pericla.Hic se praecipitem tecto dedit: ille flagellisAd mortem caesus: fugiens hic decidet acremPraedonum in turbam: dedit hic pro corpore nummos:Hunc perminxerunt calones; quin etiam illudAccidit, ut—TESTIS CAUDAMQUE SALACEM Demeterent serro (for so I say, and not Demeteret ferrum) Bleeds in Person. Silly! was he let Blood by a Surgeon? how short is this of the Amputation of the Testes and Cauda salax? What Ignorance also of Ancient Learning appears in his shallow Translation of Perminxerunt, totally missing the Mark, and not entring into the deep Meaning of the Author.cuidam TESTIS, CAUDAMQUE SALACEMDemeterent ferro. jure omnes. Galba negabat.Tutior at quanto merx est in classe secunda!Libertinarum dico: Sallustius in quaNon minus insanit, quam qui moechatur. at hic si,Qua res, qua ratio suaderet, quaque modesteMunifico esse licet, vellet bonus atque benignusEsse; daret quantum satis esset, nec sibi damnoDedecorique foret. verum hoc se amplectitur uno,Hoc amat & laudat: Matronam nullam ego tango.Ut quondam Marsaeus amator Originis, illeQui patrium mimae donat fundumque laremque,Nilfuerit mi, inquit, cum uxoribus umquam alienis.Verum est cum mimis, est cum meretricibus: undeFama malum gravius, quam res, trahit. an tibi abundePersonam satis est, non illud, quicquid ubiqueOfficit, evitare? bonam deperdere famam,Rem patris oblimare, malum est ubicumque. quid interEst in matrona, ancilla, peccesne togata?Villius in Fausta Sullae gener, hoc miser unoNomine deceptus, poenas dedit usque, superqueQuam satis est; pugnis caesus, ferroque petitus,Exclusus fore, cum Longarenus foret intus.Huic si, mutonis verbis, mala tanta videntiDiceret haec animus: Quid vis tibi? numquid ego a teMagno prognatum deposco consule Magno prognatum deposco consule Cunnum.A Thing descended from the Conqueror.A Thing descended—why Thing? the Poet has it Cunnum; which, therefore, boldly place here. BENT. CUNNUM,Velatumque stola, mea cum conferbuit ira?Quid responderet? Magno patre nata puella est.At quanto meliora monet, pugnantiaque istisDives opis natura suae! ut si modo recteDispensare velis, ac non fugienda petendisInmiscere.—Tuo vitio, rerumne labores,Nil referre putas? quare, ne poeniteat te,Desine matronas sectarier: unde laborisPlus haurire mali est, quam ex re decerpere fructus.Nec magis huic, inter niveos viridisque lapillosSit licet, o Cerinthe, tuo tenerum est femur, aut crusRectius: atque etiam melius persaepe togatae est.Adde huc, quod mercem sine fucis gestat; aperteQuod venale habet, ostendit; neque si quid honesti estJactat habetque palam, quaerit quo turpia celet.Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos mercantur; opertosInspiciunt: ne si facies, ut saepe, decoraMolli fulta pede est; emtorem ducat hiantem,Quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.Hoc illi recte. Tu corporis optima LynceiContemplare occulis; Hypsaea caecior, illaQuae mala sunt, spectas. O crus, o brachia! verumDepugis, nasuta, brevi latere, ac pede longo est.Matronae, praeter faciem, nil cernere possis;Caetera, ni Catia est, demissia veste tegentis.Si interdicta petes, vallo circumdata, (nam teHoc facit insanum) multae tibi tum officient res;Custodes, lectica, ciniflones, parasitae;Ad talos stola demissa, & circumdata palla:Plurima, quae invideant pure adparere tibi rem.Altera nil obstat: Cois tibi pene videre estUt nudam; ne crure malo, ne sit pede turpi:Metiri possis oculo latus. an tibi mavisInsidias fieri, pretiumque avellier, anteQuam mercem ostendi?—LEPOREM venator ut altaIn nive sectetur, positum sic tangere nolit:Cantat, & adponit, MEUS est amor huic similis: namTransvolar in medio posita, & fugientia captat.Hiscine versiculis speras tibi posse dolores,Atque aestus, curasque gravis e pectore tolli?Nonne, cupidinibus statuat natura modum quem,Quid latura, sibi quid sit dolitura negatum,Quacrere plus prodest; & inane abscindere soldo?Num, tibi cum faucis urit sitis, aurea quaerisPocula? num esuriens fastidis omnia praeterPAVONEM, Pea-Chicks] Not ill-render'd, meaning a young or soft Piece, Anglie a Tid-bit: such as that Delicate Youth Cerinthus, whose Flesh, our Horace expressly says, was as tender as a Lady's, and our Imitator turn'd
Such Nicety, as Lady or Lord F
not amiss truly; it agrees with My own Reading of tuo femore, instead of tuum femur, and savours of the true Taste of Antiquity. BENT. Pavonem, rhombumque? tument tibi cum inguina, num, siAncilla aut verna est praesto puer, impetus in quemContinuo fiat, malis tentigine rumpi?Non ego: namque parabilem amo venerem, facilemque.ILLAM, Post paullo, Sed pluris, Si exierit vir,Gallis: Hanc, Philodemus ait sibi, quae neque magnoStet pretio; nec cunctetur, cum est jussa venire.Candida rectaque sit; munda hactenus, ut neque longa,Nec magis alba velit, quam det natura, videri.Haec, ubi supposuit dextro corpus mihi laevum,Ilia & Egeria est: do nomen quodlibet illi.Nec vereor, ne, dum futuo, vir rure recurrat;Janua frangatur; latret canis; undique magnoPulsa domus strepitu resonet: ne pallida lectoDesiliat mulier; miseram se conscia clamet;Cruribus haec metuat, doti haec deprensa, egomet mi.Discincta tunica fugienda est, ac pede nudo;Ne nummi pereant, aut puga, aut denique fama.Deprendi miserum est: Fabio vel judice vincam.SOBER ADVICE From HORACE.Imitated from his SECOND SERMON.THE Tribe of Templars, Play'rs, Apothecaries,Pimps, Poets, Wits, Lord Fanny's, Lady Mary's,And all the Court in Tears, and half the Town,Lament dear charming Ofld, dead and gone!Engaging Ofld! who, with Grace and Ease,Could joyn the Arts, to ruin, and to please.Not so, who of Ten Thousand gull'd her Knight,Then ask'd Ten Thousand for a second Night:The Gallant too, to whom she pay'd it down;Liv'd to refuse that Mistress half a Crown.Con. Ph-l-ps cries, "A sneaking Dog I hate."That's all three Lovers have for their Estate!"Treat on, treat on," is her eternal Note,And Lands and Tenements go down her Throat.Some damn the Jade, and some the Cullies blame,But not Sir Ht, for he does the same.With all a Woman's Virtues but the Px,Fufidia thrives in Money, Land, and Stocks:For Int'rest, ten per Cent. her constant Rate is;Her Body? hopeful Heirs may have it gratis.She turns her very Sister to a Job,And, in the Happy Minute, picks your Fob:Yet starves herself, so little her own Friend,And thirsts and hungers only at one End:A Self-Tormentor, worse than (in the See My Terence, Heautontimorumenos: There is nothing in Dr. Hare's. BENT. Play)The Wretch, whose Av'rice drove his Son away.But why all this? Beloved, 'tis my Theme:"Women and Fools are always in Extreme.Rufa's at either end a Common-Shoar,Sweet Moll and Jack are Civet-Cat and Boar:
Nothing in Nature is so lewd as Peg,Yet, for the World, she would not shew her Leg!While bashful Jenny, ev'n at Morning-Prayer,A Verse taken from Mr. Pope. Spreads her Fore-Buttocks to the Navel bare.But diff'rent Taste in diff'rent Men prevails,And one is fired by Heads, and one by Tails;Some feel no Flames but at the Court or Ball,And others hunt white Aprons in the Mall.My Lord of Lon, chancing to remarkA noted Dean much busy'd in the Park,"Proceed (he cry'd) proceed, my Reverend Brother,"'Tis Fornicatio simplex, and no other:"Better than lust for Boys, with Pope and Turk,"Or others Spouses, like Others read Lord-Mayor. my Lord of May no such Praise (cries Js) e'er be mine!Js, who bows at Hisbw's hoary Shrine.All you, who think the City ne'er can thrive,Till ev'ry Cuckold-maker's flea'd alive; Attend, while I their Miseries explain,And pity Men of Pleasure still in Pain!Survey the Pangs they bear, the Risques they run,Where the most lucky are but last undone.See wretched Monsieur flies to save his Throat,And quits his Mistress, Money, Ring, and Note!K of his Footman's borrow'd Livery stript,By worthier Footmen pist upon and whipt!Plunder'd by Thieves, or Lawyers which is worse,One bleeds in Person, and one bleeds in Purse;This meets a Blanket, and that meets a Cudgel—And all applaud the Justice—All, but A Gentleman as celebrated for his Gallantries as his Politicks; an Entertaining History of which may be published, without the least Scandal on the Ladies. E. CURL.Bl.How much more safe, dear Countrymen! his State,Who trades in Frigates of the second Rate?And yet some Care of Sst should be had,Nothing so mean for which he can't run mad;His Wit confirms him but a Slave the more,And makes a Princess whom he found a Whore.The Youth might save much Trouble and Expence,Were he a Dupe of only common Sense. But here's his point; A Wench (he cries) for me!"I never touch a Dame of Quality.To Plr's Bed no Actress comes amiss,He courts the whole Personae Dramatis:He too can say, "With Wives I never sin."But Singing-Girls and Mimicks draw him in.Sure, worthy Sir, the Diff'rence is not great,With whom you lose your Credit and Estate?This, or that Person, what avails to shun?What's wrong is wrong, wherever it be done:The Ease, Support, and Lustre of your Life,Destroy'd alike with Strumpet, Maid, or Wife.What push'd poor Es on th' Imperial Whore?'Twas but to be where CHARLES had been before.The fatal Steel unjustly was apply'd,When not his Lust offended, but his Pride:Too hard a Penance for defeated Sin,Himself shut out, and Jacob Hall let in.Suppose that honest Part that rules us all,Should rise, and say—"Sir Robert! or Sir Paul! "Did I demand, in my most vig'rous hour,"A Thing descended from the Conqueror?"Or when my pulse beat highest, ask for any"Such Nicety, as Lady or Lord Fanny?—What would you answer? Could you have the Face,When the poor Suff'rer humbly mourn'd his Case,To cry, "You weep the Favours of her Spoken not of one particular Dutchess, but of divers Dutchesses. GRACE?Hath not indulgent Nature spread a Feast,The original Manuscript has it,—Spread a FeastOf—enough for Man, enough for Beast: but we prefer the present, as the purer Diction. And giv'n enough for Man, enough for Beast?But Man corrupt, perverse in all his ways,In search of Vanities from Nature strays:Yea, tho' the Blessing's more than he can use,Shuns the permitted, the forbid pursues!Weigh well the Cause from whence these Evils spring,'Tis in thyself, and not in God's good Thing:Then, lest Repentance punish such a Life,Never, ah, never! kiss thy Neighbour's Wife.First, Silks and Diamonds veil no finer Shape,Or plumper Thigh, than lurk in humble Crape:And secondly, how innocent a BelleIs she who shows what Ware she has to sell;Not Lady-like, displays a milk-white Breast,And hides in sacred Sluttishness the rest.Our ancient Kings (and sure those Kings were wise,Who judg'd themselves, and saw with their own Eyes)A War-horse never for the Service chose,But ey'd him round, and stript off all the Cloaths;For well they knew, proud Trappings serve to hideA heavy Chest, thick Neck, or heaving Side.But Fools are ready Chaps, agog to buy,Let but a comely Fore-hand strike the Eye:No Eagle sharper, every Charm to find,To all defects, Tyy not so blind:Goose-rump'd, Hawk-nos'd, Swan-footed, is my Dear?They'l praise her Elbow, Heel, or Tip o'th' Ear.A Lady's Face is all you see undress'd;(For none but Lady M show'd the Rest)
But if to Charms more latent you pretend,What Lines encompass, and what Works defend!Dangers on Dangers! obstacles by dozens!Spies, Guardians, Guests, old Women, Aunts, and Cozens!Could you directly to her Person go,Stays will obstruct above, and Hoops below,And if the Dame says yes, the Dress says no.Not thus at Ndhm's; your judicious EyeMay measure there the Breast, the Hip, the Thigh!And will you run to Perils, Sword, and Law,All for a Thing you ne're so much as saw?"The Hare once seiz'd, the Hunter heeds no more"The little Scut he so pursu'd before,"Love follows flying Game (as Sucklyn sings)"And 'tis for that the wanton Boy has Wings."Why let him Sing—but when you're in the Wrong,Think you to cure the Mischief with a Song?Has Nature set no bounds to wild Desire?No Sense to guide, no Reason to enquire,What solid Happiness, what empty Pride?And what is best indulg'd, or best deny'd? If neither Gems adorn, nor Silver tipThe flowing Bowl, will you not wet your Lip?When sharp with Hunger, scorn you to be fed,Except on Pea-Chicks, at the Bedford-head?Or, when a tight, neat Girl, will serve the Turn,In errant Pride continue stiff, and burn?I'm a plain Man, whose Maxim is profest,"The Thing at hand is of all Things the best.But Her who will, and then will not comply,Whose Word is If, Perhaps, and By-and-by,Zds! let some Eunuch or Platonic take—So Bt cries, Philosopher and Rake!Who asks no more (right reasonable Peer)Than not to wait too long, nor pay too dear.Give me a willing Nymph! 'tis all I care,Extremely clean, and tolerably fair,Her Shape her own, whatever Shape she have,And just that White and Red which Nature gave.Her I transported touch, transported view,And call her Angel! Goddess! Mue! No furious Husband thunders at the Door;No barking Dog, no Houshold in a Roar;From gleaming Swords no shrieking Women run;No wretched Wife cries out, Undone! Undone!Seiz'd in the Fact, and in her Cuckold's Pow'r,She kneels, she weeps, and worse! resigns her Dow'r.Me, naked me, to Posts, to Pumps they draw,To Shame eternal, or eternal Law.Oh Love! be deep Tranquility my Luck! Here the Imitator errs. The Latin has it dum futuo, a most necessary Circumstance! which ought to be restored; and may, by the change of a single Word, be the same with that of the Author, and one which wou'd marvelousty agree with the Ladies in the second Line. BENT.No Mistress Hyshm near, no Lady Bck!For, to be taken, is the Dev'll in Hell;This Truth, let Ll, Jys, Ow tell.FINIS.