MESSIAH.Advertisement.IN reading several passages of the prophet Isaiah, which
foretell the coming of Christ and the felicities attending it,
I could not but observe a remarkable parity between many of
the thoughts, and those in the Pollio of Virgil. This will
not seem surprising, when we reflect, that the Eclogue was
taken from a Sibylline prophecy on the same subject. One
may judge that Virgil did not copy it line by line, but selected
such ideas as best agreed with the nature of pastoral
poetry, and disposed them in that manner which served most
to beautify his piece. I have endeavoured the same in this
imitation of him, though without admitting any thing of my
own; since it was written with this particular view, that
the reader, by comparing the several thoughts, might see how
for the images and descriptions of the Prophet are superior
to those of the Poet. But as I fear I have prejudiced
them by my management, I shall subjoin the passages of
Isaiah, and those of Virgil, under the same disadvantage
of a literal translation.POPE.MESSIAH,
A
SACRED ECLOGUE,
In Imitation of
VIRGIL's POLLIO.By ALEXANDER POPE, EsqPrinted for the PROPRIETORS, and sold by
all the BOOKSELLERS. M,DCC,LXVI.MESSIAH,
A
SACRED ECLOGUE.YE nymphs of Solyma! begin the song;To heav'nly themes sublimer strains belong.The mossy fountains, and the sylvan shades,The dreams of Pindus and the Aonian maids,Delight no more—O thou my voice inspire,Who touch'd Isaiah's hallow'd lips with fire!RAPT into future times, the Bard begun:A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son!FromIsa. ix. 1.Jesse's root behold a branch arise,Whose sacred flow'r with fragrance fills the skies:Th' Aethereal spirit o'er its leaves shall move,And on its top descends the mystic Dove.
YeIsa. xlv. 8. Heav'ns! from high the dewy nectar pour,And in soft silence shed the kindly show'r!TheChap. xxv. 4. sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade.All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail;ReturningChap. ix. 7. Justice lift aloft her scale;Peace o'er the world her olive wand extend,And white-rob'd innocence from heav'n descend.
Swift fly the years, and rise th' expected morn!Oh spring to light, auspicious Babe, be born!See Nature hastes her earliest wreaths to bring,With all the incense of the breathing spring:SeeIsa. xxxv. 2. lofty Lebanon his head advance,See nodding forests on the mountains dance,See spicy clouds from lowly Saron rise▪And Carmel's flow'ry top perfumes the skies!
Hark! a glad voice the lonely desart cheers;Prepare theIsa. xl. 3, 4. way! a God, a God appears:A God, a God! the vocal hills reply,The rocks proclaim th' approaching Deity.Lo, earth receives him from the bending skies!Sink down, ye mountains, and, ye vallies, rise;With heads declin'd, ye cedars, homage pay;Be smooth, ye rocks, ye rapid floods give way!The SAVIOUR comes! by ancient bards foretold:HearChap. xliii. 18. xxxv. 5. 6, him, ye deaf, and, all ye blind, behold!
He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,And on the sightless eye-ball pour the day.Tis he th' obstructed paths of sound shall clear,And bid new music charm th' unfolding ear:The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,And leap exulting like the bounding roe;No sigh, no murmur the wide world shall hear,From ev'ry face he wipes off ev'ry tear:InIsa. xxv. 8. adamantine chains shall death be bound,And hell's grim tyrant feel th' eternal wound.As the goodChap. xl. 11. shepherd tends his fleecy care,Seeks freshest pastures and the purest air,Explores the lost, the wand'ring sheep directs,By day o'ersees them, and by night protects,The tender lambs he raises in his arms,Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;
Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,The promis'dIsa. ix. 6. father of the future age.No more shallChap. ii. 4. nation against nation rise,Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,Nor fields with gleaming steel be cover'd o'er,The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;But useless lances into scythes shall bend,And the broad faulchion in a plow-share end.Then palaces shall rise; the joyfulChap. lxv. 21, 22. SonShall finish what his short-liv'd Sire begun;Their vines a shadow to their race shall yield,And the same hand that sow'd shall reap the field.The swain in barrenChap. xxxv. 1, 7. desarts with surpriseSee lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise,And starts amidst the thirsty wilds to hearNew falls of water murm'ring in his ear:On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,The green reed trembles, and the bulrush nods.
Vaste sandyIsa. xli. 19. and Chap. lv. 13. valleys, once perplex'd with thorn,The spiry fir and shapely box adorn:To leafless shrubs the flow'ring palms succeed,And od'rous myrtle to the noisome weed.TheChap. xi. 6, 7, 8. lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,And boys on flow'ry banks the tyger lead!The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,And harmlessChap. lxv. 25. serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.The smiling infant in his hand shall takeThe crested basilisk and speckled snake;Pleas'd, the green lustre of the scales survey,And with their forky tongue shall innocently play.Rise, crown'd with light, imperialChap. lx. 1.Salem, rise!Exalt thy tow'ry head, and lift thy eyes!
See, a longIsa. lx. 4. race thy spacious courts adorn;See future sons, and daughters yet unborn,In crowding ranks, on every side arise,Demanding life, impatient for the skies!See barb'rousCh. lx. 3. nations at thy gates attend,Walk in thy light, and in thy temple bend;See thy bright altars throng'd with prostrate Kings,And heap'd with products of SabeanCh. lx. 6. springs!For thee Idume's spicy forests blow,And seeds of gold in Ophir's mountains glow.See heav'n its sparkling portals wide display,And break upon thee in a flood of day.No more the risingCh. lx. 19, 20. Sun shall gild the morn,Nor ev'ning Cynthia fill her silver horn,But lost, dissolv'd in thy superior rays,One tide of glory, one unclouded blazeO'erflow thy courts: the LIGHT HIMSELF shall shiReveal'd, and God's eternal day be thine!TheCh. li. 6. and Ch. liv. 10. seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;But fix'd his word, his saving power remains,Thy realm for ever lasts, thy own MESSIAH reignIMITATIONS.VER. 8. A Virgin shall conceive—All crimes shall cease, &c.VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 6.Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;Jam nova progenies caelo demittiur alto.Te duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras—.Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem.Now the Virgin returns, now the kingdom of Saturn
returns, now a new progeny is sent down from high heaven.
By means of thee, whatever reliques of our crimes

remain, shall be wiped away, and free the world from perpetual
fears. He shall govern the earth in peace, with
the virtues of his Father.ISAIAH, Chap. vii. ver. 14. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive and born a Son.—Chap. ix. ver. 6, 7. Unto
us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; the Prince of
Peace: of the increase of his government, and of his
peace, there shall be no end: Upon the throne of David,
and upon his kingdom, to order and establish it, with
judgment, and with justice for ever and ever. P.VER. 23. See Nature hastes, &c.]
VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 18.At tibi prima, puer, nullo munuscula cultu,Errantes hederas passim cum baccare tellus,Mixtaque ridenti colocasia funder acantho—Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabula flores.For thee, O Child, shall the earth, without being tilled,
produce her early offerings; winding ivy, mixed with
Baccar, and Colocasia with smiling Achanthus. Thy cradle
shall pour forth pleasing flowers about thee.ISAIAH, Ch. xxxv. ver. 1. The wilderness and the
solitary place shall be glad, and the desart shall rejoice and
blossom as the rose. Ch. lx. ver. 13. The glory of
Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir-tree, the pine-tree,
and the box together, to beautify the place of thy sanctuary. P.VER. 29. Hark, a glad voice, &c.]
VIRG. Ecl. iv. 46.Aggredere o magnos, aderit jam tempus, honores,Cara deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum—Ipsi laetitia voces ad sydera jactantIntonsi montes, ipsae jam carmina rupes,Ipsa sonant arbusta, Deus, deus ille Menalca!Ecl. v. ver. 62.Oh come and receive the mighty honours: the time
draws nigh, O beloved offspring of the Gods, O great increase
of Jove! The uncultivated mountains send shouts
of joy to the stars, the very rocks sing in verse, the very
shrubs cry out, A God, a God!ISAIAH, Ch. xl. ver. 3, 4. The voice of him that
crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord!
make strait in the desart a high-way for our God! Every
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall
be made low, and the crooked shall be made strait, and
the rough places plain. Ch. iv. ver. 23. Break forth
into singing, ye mountains! O forest, and every tree
therein! for the Lord hath redeemed Israel. P.VER. 67. The swain in barren desarts, &c.]
VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 28.Molli paulatim flavescet campus aristaIncultisque rubens pendebit sentibus uva,Et durae quercus sodabunt roscida mella.The fields shall grow yellow with ripened ears, and the
red grape shall hang upon the wild brambles, and the
hard oaks shall distil honey like dew.ISAIAH, Ch. xxxv. ver 7. The parched ground shall
become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: In
the habitations where dragons lay, shall be grass, and reeds
and rushes. Ch. lv. ver. 13. Instead of the thorn
shall come up the fir-tree, and instead of the briar shall
come up the myrtle-tree. P.VER. 77. The lambs with wolves, &c.]
VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 21.Ipsae lacte domum referent distenta capellaeUbera, nec magnos metuent armenta leones—Occidet et ser pens, et fallax herba veneni,Occidet.—The goats shall bear to the fold their udders distended
with milk: nor shall the herds be afraid of the greatest
lions. The serpent shall die, and the herb that conceals
poison shall die.ISAIAH, Ch. xi. ver. 16, &c. The wolf shall dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the
kid, and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together:
and a little child shall lead them.—And the
lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child
shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child
shall put his hand on the den of the cockatrice. P.VER. 85. Rise, crown'd with light, imperial Salem, rise!]
The thoughts of Isaiah, which compose the latter part of

the poem, are wonderfully elevated, and much above thos
general exclamations of Virgil, which make the loftiest part
of his Pollio.Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo!—toto surget gens aurea mundo!—incipient magni procedere menses!Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia saeclo! etc.The reader needs only to turn to the passages of Isaiab, here
cited. P.REMARKS.VER. 15. Ye Heav'ns! from high the dewy nectar pour,And in soft silence shed the kindly show'r!His Original says, Drop down, ye heavens, from above,
and let the skies pour down righteousness; let the earth
open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness
spring up together.—This is a very noble description
of divine grace shed abroad in the hearts of the
faithful under the Gospel dispensation. And the poet understood
all its force as appears from the two lines preceding
these,—Th' Aethereal Spirit, &c. The prophet describes
this under the image of rain, which chiefly fits the first age
of the Gospel: The poet, under the idea of dew, which extends
it to every age. And as it was his purpose it should be
o understood, as appears from this expression of soft silence,
which agrees with the common, not the extraordinary effusions
of the Holy Spirit. The figurative term is wonderfully happy.
He who would moralize the ancient Mythology in the
manner of Bacn, must say, that by the poetical nectar, is
meant theological grace.VER. 17. ancient fraud] i. e. the fraud of the Serpent.VER. 39. He from thick films shall purge the visual ray.]
The sense and language shew, that by visual ray, the poet
meant the sight, or, as Milton calls it, indeed, something less
boldly, visual nerve. And no critic would quarrel with the
figure which calls the instrument of vision by the name of the
cause. But though the term be just, nay noble, and even
sublime, yet the expression of thick films is faulty, and he fell
into it by a common neglect of the following rule of good
writing, That when a figurative word is used, whatsoever
is predicated of it ought not only to agree in terms to
the thing to which the figure is applied, but likewise to
that from which the figure is taken.Thick films agree
only with the thing to which it is applied, namely, to the
sight or eve; and not to that from which it is taken, namely,
a ray of light coming to the eye. He should have said thick
clouds, which would have agreed with both. But these inaccuracies
are not to be found in his later poems.