LETHE.
A
DRAMATIC SATIRE.[Price One Shilling.]LETHE.
A
DRAMATIC SATIRE.By DAVID GARRICK.As it is Performed at the
THEATRE-ROYAL in DRURY-LANE,
By His MAJESTY's Servants.LONDON:
Printed for and Sold by PAUL VAILLANT,
facing Southampton-Street in the Strand.
MDCCXLIX.DRAMATIS PERSONAE.AesopMr. Bridges.MercuryMr. Beard.CharonMr. Winstone.PoetMr. Garrick.FrenchmanMr. Garrick.Drunken ManMr. Garrick.A Fine GentlemanMr. Woodward.Mr. TatooMr. King.Old ManMr. Taswell.TaylorMr. Yates.Mrs. RiotMrs. Clive.Mrs. TatooMrs. Green.LETHE.SCENE a Grove,With a View of the River Lethe.CHARON and AESOP discover'd.CHARON.PRITHEE, Philosopher, what
grand Affair is transacting upon
Earth? There is something of Importance
going forward I am sure;
for Mercury flew over the Styx this Morning,
without paying me the usual Compliments.Aesop.I'll tell thee, Charon; this is the
Anniversary of the Rape of Proserpine; on
which Day for the future, Pluto has permitted
her to demand from him something
for the Benefit of Mankind.Char.I understand you;—his Majesty's
Passions, by a long Possession of the Lady,
are abated; and so, like a mere Mortal, he
must now flatter her Vanity, and sacrifice his
Power, to attone for Deficiencies—But what
has our Royal Mistress proposed in behalf of
her favourite Mortals?Aesop.As Mankind, you know, are ever
complaining of their Cares, and dissatisfied
with their Conditions, the generous Proserpine
has begg'd of Pluto, that they may
have free Access to the Waters of Lethe, as
a sovereign Remedy for their Complaints—
Notice has been already given above, and
Proclamation made: Mercury is to conduct
them to the Styx, you are to ferry 'em over
to Elysium, and I am placed here to distribute
the Waters.Char.A very pretty Employment, I shall
have of it, truly! If her Majesty has often
these Whims; I must petition the
Court either to build a Bridge over the
River, or let me resign my Employment.
Do their Majesties know the Difference of
Weight between Souls and Bodies? However,
I'll obey their Commands to the best
of my Power; I'll row my crazy Boat over
and meet 'em; but many of them will be
relieved from their Cares before they reach
Lethe.Aesop.How so, Charon?Char.Why, I shall leave half of 'em in the
Styx; and any Water is a Specifick against
Care, provided it be taken in Quantity.Enter Mercury.Mer.Away to your Boat, Charon; there
are some Mortals arriv'd; and the Females
among 'em will be very clamorous, if you
make 'em wait.Cha.I'll make what Haste I can, rather
than give those fair Creatures a Topick for
Conversation.Noise within. Boat, Boat, Boat!Coming—coming—Zounds, you are in a
plaguy Hurry, sure!—No wonder these mortal
Folks have so many Complaints, when
there's no Patience among 'em; if they were
dead now, and to be settled here for ever, they'd
be damn'd before they'd make such a Rout
to come over,—but Care I suppose is thirsty,
and 'till they have drench'd themselves with
Lethe, there will be no Quiet among 'em;
therefore I'll e'en to work; and so Friend
Aesop, and Brother Mercury, good bye to 'ye. [Exit Charon.Aesop.Now to my Office of Judge and
Examiner, in which, to the best of my Knowledge,
I will act with Impartiality; for I
will immediately relieve real Objects, and
only divert myself with Pretenders.Mer.Act as your Wisdom directs, and
conformable to your earthly Character, and
we shall have few Murmurers.Aesop.I still retain my former Sentiments,
never to refuse Advice or Charity to those
that want either; Flattery and Rudeness
should be equally avoided; Folly and Vice
should never be spared; and tho' by acting
thus, you may offend many, yet you will
please the better few; and the Approbation
of one virtuous Mind, is more valuable than
all the noisy Applause, and uncertain Favours,
of the Great and Guilty.Mer.Incomparable Aesop! both Men and
Gods admire thee! We must now prepare to
receive these Mortals; and lest the Solemnity
of the Place shou'd strike 'em with too
much Dread, I'll raise Musick shall dispel
their Fears, and embolden them to approach.SONG.I.Ye Mortals whom Fancies and Troubles perplex,Whom Folly misguides, and Infirmities vex;Whose Lives hardly know what it is to be blest,Who rise without Joy, and lie down without
Rest;Obey the glad Summons, to Lethe repair,Drink deep of the Stream, and forget all
your Care.II.Old Maids shall forget what they wish for in
vain,And young ones the Rover, they cannot regain;The Rake shall forget how last Night he was
cloy'd,And Cloe again be with Passion enjoy'd;Obey then the Summons, to Lethe repair,And drink an Oblivion to Trouble and Care.III.The Wife at one Draught may forget all her
Wants,Or drench her fond Fool, to forget her Gallants;The troubled in Mind shall go chearful away,And Yesterday's Wretch, be quite happy to-day;Obey then the Summons, to Lethe repair,Drink deep of the Stream, and forget all
your Care.Aesop.Mercury, Charon has brought over
one Mortal already, conduct him hither. [Exit Mercury.Now for a large Catalogue of Complaints,
without the Acknowledgment of one single
Vice!—here he comes—if one may guess at
his Cares by his Appearance, he really wants
the Assistance of Lethe.
Enter Poet.Poet.Sir, your humble Servant—your
humble Servant—your Name is Aesop—I
know your Person intimately, tho' I never
saw you before; and am well acquainted
with you, tho' I never had the Honour of
your Conversation.Aesop.You are a Dealer in Paradoxes,
Friend.Poet.I am a Dealer in all Parts of Speech,
and in all the Figures of Rhetorick—I am a
Poet, Sir—and to be a Poet, and not acquainted
with the great Aesop, is a greater
Paradox than—I honour you extremely, Sir;
you certainly, of all the Writers of Antiquity,
had the greatest, the sublimest Genius, the—Aesop.Hold, Friend, I hate Flattery.Poet.My own Taste exactly;—I assure you,
Sir, no Man loves Flattery less than myself.Aesop.So it appears, Sir, by your being
so ready to give it away.Poet.You have hit it, Mr. Aesop, you have
hit it—I have given it away, indeed—I did
not receive one Farthing for my last Dedication,
and yet would you believe it?—I
absolutely gave all the Virtues in Heav'n, to
one of the lowest Reptiles upon Earth.Aesop.'Tis hard, indeed, to do dirty Work
for nothing.Poet.Ay, Sir, to do dirty Work, and still
be dirty oneself, is the Stone of Sysiphus, and
the Thirst of Tantalus—You Greek Writers,
indeed, carried your Point by Truth and Simplicity,—
they won't do now a-days—our
Patrons must be tickled into Generosity—you
gain'd the greatest Favours, by shewing your
own Merits, we can only gain the smallest,
by publishing those of other People.—You
flourish'd by Truth, we starve by Fiction;
Tempora mutantur.Aesop.Indeed, Friend, if we may guess
by your present Plight, you have prostituted
your Talents to very little Purpose.Poet.To very little, upon my word—but
they shall find that I can open another Vein
—Satire is the Fashion, and Satire they shall
have—let 'em look to it, I can be sharp as
well as sweet—I can scourge as well as tickle,
I can bite as—Aesop.You can do any thing, no doubt;
but to the Business of this Visit, for I expect
a great deal of Company—What are
your Troubles, Sir?Poet.Why, Mr. Aesop, I am troubled with
an odd kind of a Disorder—I have a sort of
a Whistling—a Singing—a Whizzing as
it were in my Head, which I cannot get
rid of—Aesop.Our Waters give no Relief to bodily
Disorders, they only affect the Memory.Poet.From whence all my Disorder proceeds—
I'll tell you my Case, Sir—
You must know, I wrote a Play some time
ago, presented a Dedication of it to a certain
young Nobleman—He approv'd and accepted
of it, but before I could taste his
Bounty, my Piece was unfortunately damn'd:
—I lost my Benefit, nor could I have Recourse
to my Patron, for I was told that his
Lordship play'd the best Catcall the first
Night, and was the merriest Person in the
whole Audience.Aesop.Pray, what do you call damning a
Play?—Poet.You cannot possibly be ignorant,
what it is to be damn'd, Mr. Aesop?Aesop.Indeed I am, Sir—We had no
such thing among the Greeks.Poet.No, Sir!—No Wonder then that
you Greeks were such fine Writers—It is
impossible to be describ'd, or truly felt, but
by the Author himself—If you could but
get a Leave of Absence from this World for
a few Hours, you might perhaps have an
Opportunity of seeing it yourself—There is
a Sort of a new Piece comes upon our Stage
this very Night, and I am pretty sure it will
meet with its Deserts; at least it shall not
want my helping Hand, rather than you
should be disappointed of satisfying your
Curiosity.Aesop.You are very obliging, Sir;—but to
your own Misfortunes, if you please.Poet.Envy, Malice and Party destroy'd
me—You
must know, Sir, I was a great
Damner myself, before I was damn'd—So
the Frolicks of my Youth were return'd to me
with double Interest, from my Brother Authors—But,
to say the Truth, my Performance
was terribly handled, before it appear'd
in publick.Aesop.How so, pray?Poet.Why Sir, some squeamish Friends
of mine prun'd it of all the Bawdy and Immorality,
the Actors did not speak a Line of
the Sense or Sentiment, and the Manager
(who writes himself) struck out all the
Wit and Humour, in order to lower my
Performance to a Level with his own.Aesop.Now, Sir, I am acquainted with
your Case, what have you to propose?Poet.Notwithstanding the Success of my
first Play, I am strongly persuaded that my
next may defy the Severity of Criticks, the
Sneer of Wits, and the Malice of Authors.Aesop.What! have you been hardy enough
to attempt another?Poet.I must eat, Sir—I must live—but
when I sit down to write, and am glowing
with the Heat of my Imagination, then—this
damn'd Whistling—or Whizzing in my
Head, that I told you of, so disorders me,
that I grow giddy—In short, Sir, I am

haunted, as it were, with the Ghost of my
deceas'd Play, and its dying Groans, are for
ever in my Ears—Now, Sir, if you will
give me but a Draught of Lethe, to forget
this unfortunate Performance, it will be of
more real Service to me, than all the Waters
of Helicon.Aesop.I doubt, Friend, you cannot possibly
write better, by merely forgetting that
you have written before; besides, if, when
you drink to the Forgetfulness of your own
Works, you should unluckily forget those of
other People too, your next Piece will certainly
be the worse for it.Poet.You are certainly in the right—
What then would you advise me to?Aesop.Suppose you could prevail upon the
Audience to drink the Water; their forgetting
your former Work, might be of no small Advantage
to your future Productions.Poet.Ah, Sir! if I could but do that—
but I am afraid—Lethe will never go down
with the Audience.Aesop.Well, since you are bent upon it, I
shall indulge you—If you please to walk in
that Grove, (which will afford you many
Subjects for your poetical Contemplation) till
I have examin'd the rest, I will dismiss you
in your Turn.Poet.And I in return, Sir, will let the
World know, in a Preface to my next Piece,
that your Politeness is equal to your Sagacity,

and that you are as much the fine Gentleman
as the Philosopher. [Exit Poet.Aesop.Oh! your Servant, Sir—In the
Name of Misery and Mortality, what have
we here!Enter an Old Man, supported by a Servant.Old Man.Oh la! oh! bless me, I shall
never recover the Fatigue—Ha! what are
you Friend? Are you the famous Aesop?
And are you so kind, so very good to give
People the Waters of Forgetfulness for nothing?Aesop.I am that Person, Sir; but you
seem to have no need of my Waters; for
you must have already out-liv'd your Memory.Old Man.My Memory is indeed impair'd,
it is not so good as it was; but still it is better
than I wish it, at least in regard to one
Circumstance; there is one Thing which
sits very heavy at my Heart, and which I
would willingly forget.Aesop.What is it, pray?Old Man.Oh la!—oh!—I am horribly
fatigued—I am an old Man, Sir, turn'd of
Ninety—We are all mortal, you know, so
I would fain forget, if you please—that I am
to die.Aesop.My good Friend, you have mistaken
the Virtue of the Waters: They can cause

you to forget only what is past; but if this
was in their Power, you would surely be
your own Enemy, in desiring to forget what
ought to be the only Comfort of one, so poor
and wretched as you seem. What! I suppose
now, you have left some dear loving Wife
behind, that you can't bear to think of parting
with.Old Man.No, no, no; I have buried my
Wife, and forgot her long ago.Aesop.What, you have Children then,
whom you are unwilling to leave behind
you?Old Man.No, no; I have no Children at
present—hugh—I don't know what I may
have.Aesop.Is there any Relation or Friend, the
Loss of whom—Old Man.No, no; I have out-lived all my
Relations; and as for Friends—I have none
to lose—Aesop.What can be the Reason then, that
in all this apparent Misery you are so afraid
of Death, which would be your only Cure.Old Man.—Oh, Lord!—I have one
Friend, and a true Friend indeed, the only
Friend in whom a wise Man places any Confidence—I
have—Get a little farther
off, John— [Servant retires.]
I have, to say the Truth, a little Money—
it is that indeed, which causes all my Uneasiness.Aesop.Thou never spok'st a truer Word
in thy Life, old Gentleman— [Aside.]
But I can cure you of your Uneasiness immediately.Old Man.Shall I forget then that I am to
die, and leave my Money behind me?Aesop.No—but you shall forget that you
have it—which will do altogether as well—
One large Draught of Lethe, to the Forgetfulness
of your Money, will restore you to
perfect Ease of Mind; and as for your bodily
Pains, no Waters can relieve them.Old Man.What does he say, John—eh?
—I am hard of Hearing.John.He advises your Worship to drink to
forget your Money.Old Man.What!—what!—will his
Drink get me Money, does he say?Aesop.No, Sir, the Waters are of a wholsomer
Nature—for they'll teach you to forget
your Money.Old Man.Will they so?—Come, come,
John, we are got to the wrong Place—
The pool old Fool here does not know what
he says—Let us go back again, John—
I'll drink none of your Waters, not I—
Forget my Money! Come along, John.[Exeunt.Aesop.Was there ever such a Wretch! If
these are the Cares of Mortals, the Waters
of Oblivion cannot cure them.
Re-enter Old Man and Servant.Old Man.Lookee Sir, I am come a great
Way, and am loth to refuse Favours that
cost nothing—so I don't care if I drink a little
of your Waters—Let me see—ay—I'll
drink to forget how I got my Money—
And my Servant there, he shall drink a little,
to forget that I have any Money at all—and,
d'ye hear, John—take a hearty Draught. If
my Money must be forgot, why e'en let him
forget it.Aesop.Well, Friend, it shall be as you
would have it—You'll find a Seat in that
Grove yonder, where you may rest yourself
till the Waters are distributed.Old Man.I hope it won't be long, Sir, for
Thieves are busy now—and I have an Iron
Chest in the other World, that I should be
sorry any one peep'd into but myself—
So pray be quick, Sir.[Exeunt.Aesop.Patience, Patience, old Gentleman.
—But here comes something tripping this
Way, that seems to be neither Man nor Woman,
and yet an odd Mixture of both.Enter a Fine Gentleman.Fine Gent.Harkee, old Friend, do you
stand Drawer here?Aesop.Drawer, young Fop! Do you know
where you are, and who you talk to?Fine Gent.Not I, dem me! But 'tis a
Rule with me, wherever I am, or whoever
I am with, to be always easy and familiar.Aesop.Then let me advise you, young
Gentleman, to drink the Waters, and forget
that Ease and Familiarity.Fine Gent.Why so, Daddy? wou'd you
not have me well bred?Aesop.Yes; but you may not always meet
with People so polite as yourself, or so passive
as I am; and if what you call Breeding,
shou'd be constru'd Impertinence, you may
have a Return of Familiarity, may make
you repent your Education as long as you
live.Fine Gent.Well said, old Dry-beard, egad
you have a Smattering of an odd kind of a
sort of a Humour; but come, come, prithee
give me a Glass of your Waters, and keep
your Advice to yourself.Aesop.I must first be informed, Sir, for
what Purpose you drink 'em.Fine Gent.You must know, Philosopher,
I want to forget two Qualities—My Modesty,
and my Good-nature.Aesop.Your Modesty and Good-nature!Fine Gent.Yes, Sir—I have such a consummate
Modesty, that when a fine Woman
(which is often the Case) yields to my Addresses,
egad I run away from her; and I am

so very good-natured, that when a Man affronts
me, egad I run away too.Aesop.As for your Modesty, Sir, I am
afraid you are come to the wrong Waters;—
and if you will take a large Cup to the Forgetfulness
of your Fears, your Good-nature, I
believe, will trouble you no more.Fine Gent.And this is your Advice, my
Dear, eh?Aesop.My Advice, Sir, would go a great
deal farther—I should advise you to drink to
the Forgetfulness of every thing you know.Fine Gent.The Devil you would; then
I should have travell'd to a fine Purpose
truly; you don't imagine, perhaps, that I
have been three Years abroad, and have made
the Tour of Europe?Aesop.Yes Sir, I guess'd you had travell'd
by your Dress and Conversation: But, pray,
(with Submission) what valuable Improvements
have you made in these Travels?Fine Gent.Sir, I learnt Drinking in Germany,
Musick and Painting in Italy, Dancing,
Gaming, and some other Amusements, at
Paris; and in Holland—faith, nothing at all;
I brought over with me the best Collection
of Venetian Ballads, two Eunuchs, a French
Dancer, and a Monkey, with Tooth-picks,
Pictures and Burlettas—In short, I have skim'd
the Cream of every Nation, and have the
Consolation to declare, I never was in any

Country in my Life, but I had Taste enough
thoroughly to despise my own.Aesop.Your Country is greatly obliged to
you,—but if you are settled in it now, how
can your Taste and Delicacy endure it?Fine Gent.Faith my Existence is merely
supported by Amusements; I dress, visit,
study Taste, and write Sonnets; by Birth,
Travel, Education, and natural Abilities, I
am entitled to lead the Fashion; I am principal
Connoisseur at all Auctions, chief Arbiter
at Assemblies, profess'd Critick at the
Theatres, and a fine Gentleman—every
where—Aesop.Critick, Sir, pray what's that?Fine Gent.The Delight of the Ingenious,
the Terror of Poets, the Scourge of Players,
and the Aversion of the Vulgar.Aesop.Pray, Sir, (for I fancy your Life
must be somewhat particular) how do you
pass your Time; the Day, for Instance?Fine Gent.I lie in Bed all Day, Sir.Aesop.How do you spend your Evenings
then?Fine Gent.I dress in the Evening, and go
generally behind the Scenes of both Playhouses;
not, you may imagine to be diverted
with the Play, but to intrigue, and shew myself—I
stand upon the Stage, talk loud,
and stare about—which confounds the Actors,
and disturbs the Audience; upon which the

Galleries, who hate the Appearance of one
of us, begin to hiss, and cry off, off, while I
undaunted, stamp my Foot so—loll with my
Shoulder thus—take Snuff with my Right-hand,
and smile scornfully—thus—This
exasperates the Savages, and they attack us
with Vollies of suck'd Oranges, and half
eaten Pippins—Aesop.And you retire.Fine Gent.Without doubt, if I am sober
—for Orange will stain Silk, and an Apple
may disfigure a Feature.Aesop.I am afraid, Sir, for all this, that
you are oblig'd to your own Imagination, for
more than three Fourths of your Importance.Fine Gent.Damn the old Prig, I'll bully
him— [Aside.] Lookee, old Philosopher,
I find you have pass'd your Time so
long in Gloom and Ignorance below here,
that our Notions above Stairs are too refined
for you; so as we are not likely to agree, I
shall cut Matters very short with you—Bottle
me off the Waters I want, or you shall
be convinc'd that I have Courage, in the
drawing of a Cork;—dispatch me instantly,
or I shall make bold to throw you into the
River, and help myself—What say you to
that now? eh?Aesop.Very civil and concise! I have no
great Inclination to put your Manhood to
the Trial; so if you will be pleas'd to walk
in the Grove there, 'till I have examined

some I see coming, we'll compromise the
Affair between us.Fine Gent.Yours as you behave,—au Revoir![Exit Beau.Enter Mr. and Mrs. Tatoo.Mrs. Tatoo.Why don't you come along,
Mr. Tatoo? what the deuce are you afraid
of?Aesop.Don't be angry, young Lady; the
Gentleman is your Husband, I suppose.Mrs. Tat.How do you know that, eh?
What, you an't all Conjurers in this World,
are you?Aesop.Your Behaviour to him is a sufficient
Proof of his Condition, without the Gift
of Conjuration.Mrs. Tat.Why, I was as free with him
before Marriage, as I am now; I never was
coy or prudish in my Life.Aesop.I believe you, Madam; pray how
long have you been married? you seem to be
very young, Lady?Mrs. Tat.I am old enough for a Husband,
and have been married long enough to be
tired of one.Aesop.How long, pray?Mrs. Tat.Why, above three Months; I
married Mr. Tatoo without my Guardians
Consent.Aesop.If you married him with your own
Consent, I think you might continue your
Affections a little longer.Mrs. Tat.What signifies what you think,
if I don't think so?—We are quite tired of
one another, and are come to drink some of
your Le—Lethaly—Leithily, I think they
call it, to forget one another, and be unmarried
again.Aesop.The Waters can't divorce you, Madam;
and you may easily forget him, without
the Assistance of Lethe.Mrs. Tat.Ay; how so?Aesop.By remembering continually he is
your Husband, there are several Ladies have
no other Receipt—But what does the Gentleman
say to this?Mrs. Tat.What signifies what he says? I
an't so young and so foolish as that comes
to, to be directed by my Husband, or to care
what either he says, or you say.Mr. Tat.Sir, I was a Drummer in a Marching
Regiment, when I ran away with that
young Lady—I immediately bought out of
the Corps, and thought myself made for
ever; little imagining that a poor vain Fellow
was purchasing Fortune, at the Expence of
his Happiness.Aesop.'Tis even so, Friend; Fortune and
Felicity are as often at Variance as Man and
Wife.Mr. Tat.I found it so, Sir—This high
Life (as I thought it) did not agree with
me; I have not laugh'd, and scarcely slept
since my Advancement, and unless your Wisdom
can alter her Notions, I must e'en quit
the Blessings of a fine Lady and her Portion,
and for Content, have Recourse to Eight-pence
a Day, and my Drum again.Aesop.Pray who has advis'd you to a Separation?Mrs. Tat.Several young Ladies of my Acquaintance,
who tell me they are not angry
at me for marrying him, but being fond of
him now I have married him; and they say
I should be as compleat a fine Lady as any
of 'em, if I would but procure a separate
Divorcement.Aesop.Pray, Madam, will you let me know
what you call a fine Lady?Mrs. Tat.Why, a fine Lady, and a fine
Gentleman, are two of the finest Things
upon Earth.Aesop.I have just now had the Honour
of knowing what a fine Gentleman is; so
pray confine yourself to the Lady.Mrs. Tat.A fine Lady before Marriage,
lives with her Papa and Mama, who breed
her up till she learns to despise 'em, and resolves
to do nothing they bid her; this makes
her such a prodigious Favourite, that she
wants for nothing.Aesop.So, Lady.Mrs. Tat.When once she is her own Mistress,
then comes the Pleasure!—Aesop.Pray let us hear.Mrs. Tat.She lies in Bed all Morning,
rattles about all Day, and sits up all Night;
she goes every where, and sees every thing;
knows every body, and loves no body; ridicules
her Friends, coquets with her Lovers,
sets 'em together by the Ears, tells Fibs,
makes Mischief, buys China, cheats at Cards,
keeps a Pug-dog, and hates the Parsons; she
laughs much, talks aloud, never blushes, says
what she will, does what she will, goes where
she will, marries whom she pleases, hates
her Husband in a Month, breaks his Heart
in four, becomes a Widow, slips from her
Gallants, and begins the World again—
There's a Life for you? What do you think
of a fine Lady now?Aesop.As I expected—you are very young
Lady! and if you are not very careful, your
natural Propensity to Noise and Affectation,
will run you headlong into Folly, Extravavagance,
and Repentance.Mrs. Tat.What would you have me do?Aesop.Drink a large Quantity of Lethe to
the Loss of your Acquaintance; and do you,
Sir, drink another to forget this false Step of
your Wife; for whilst you remember her
Folly, you can never thoroughly regard her,
and whilst you keep good Company, Lady,

as you call it, and follow their Example, you
can never have a just Regard for your Husband;
so both drink and be happy.Mrs. Tat.Well, give it me whilst I am
in Humour, or I shall certainly change my
Mind again.Aesop.Be patient, till the rest of the Company
drink, and divert yourself, in the mean
time, with walking in the Grove.Mrs. Tat.Well, come along, Husband,
and keep me in Humour, or I shall beat you
such an Alarum as you never beat in all your
Life.[Exeunt Mr. and Mrs. Tattoo.Enter Frenchman, singing.French.Monsieur, votre Serviteur—pourquoi
ne repondez vous pas?—Je dis que je suis
votre Serviteur—Aesop.I don't understand you, Sir—French.Ah le Barbare! il ne parle pas François—
Vat, Sir, you no speak de French
Tongue?Aesop.No really, Sir, I am not so polite.French.En verité, Monsieur Esope, you
have not much Politesse, if one may be Judge
by your Figure and Apparance.Aesop.Nor you much Wisdom, if one may
judge of your Head, by the Ornaments about
it.French.Qu'est cela donc? Vat you mean
to front a Man, Sir?Aesop.No, Sir, 'tis to you I am speaking.French.Vel, Sir, I not a Man! vat is you
take me for? vat I Beast? vat I Horse? parbleu!Aesop.If you insist upon it, Sir, I would
advise you to lay aside your Wings and Tail,
for they undoubtedly eclipse your Manhood.French.Upon my Vard, Sir, if you treat
a Gentilhomme of my Rank and Qualité
comme ça, depen upon it, I shall be a
littel en Cavalier vit you.Aesop.Pray, Sir, of what Rank and Quality
are you?French.Sir, I am a Marquis François,
j'entens les Beaux Arts, Sir, I have been an
Avanturier all over the Varld, and am à
present en Angleterre, in Ingland, vere I am
more honoré and caress, den ever I vas in my
own Countrie, or inteed any vere else—Aesop.And pray, Sir, what is your Business
in England?French.I am arrivé dere, Sir, pour polir
la Nation—de Inglis Sir, have too
much a Lead in deir Heel, and too much a
Tought in deir Head, so, Sir, if I can
ligten bote, I shall make dem tout à fait
François, and quite anoder ting.Aesop.And pray, Sir, in what particular
Accomplishments does your Merit consist?French.Sir, I speak de French, j'ai bonne
Addresse, I dance un Minuet, I sing des littel
Chansons, and I have—une tolerable Assurance:

En fin, Sir, my Merit consist in one Vard—
I am Foreignere—and entre nous—vile de Englis
be so great a Fool to love de Foreignere
better dan demselves, de Foreignere vould still
be more great a Fool, did dey not leave deir
own Counterie vere dey have noting at all,
and come to Inglande, vere dey vant for noting
at all, perdie—Cela n'est il pas vrai,
Monsieur Aesope?Aesop.Well, Sir, what is your Business
with me?French.Attendez un peu, you shall hear,
Sir—I am in Love vith the grande Fortune of
one Englis Lady; and de Lady, she be in
Love with my Qualité and Bagatelles. Now,
Sir, me vant twenty or tirty Douzaines of
your Vaters, for fear I be obligé to leave Inglande,
before I have fini dis grande Affaire.Aesop.Twenty or thirty Dozen! for what?French.For my Crediteurs; to make 'em
forget the Vay to my Logement, and no
trouble me for the future.Aesop.What! have you so many Creditors?French.So many! begar I have 'em dans
tous les Quartiers de la Ville, in all Parts of
the Town, fait—Aesop.Wonderful and surprizing!French.Vonderful! Vat is vonderful—
dat I should borrow Money?Aesop.No, Sir, that any body should lend
it you—French.En verité vous vous trompez; you
do mistake it, mon Ami: If Fortune give me
no Money, Nature give me des Talens; j'ai
des Talens, Monsieur Aesope; vich are de same
ting—par Example; de Englisman have de
Money, I have de Flatterie and bonne Addresse;
and a little of dat from a French
Tongue is very good Credit and Securité for
tousand Pound—Eh! bien donc, sal I have
this twenty or tirty Douzaines of your Vater?
Ouy ou non?Aesop.'Tis impossible, Sir.French.Impossible! pourquoi donc? vy
not?Aesop.Because if every fine Gentleman,
who owes Money, should make the same
Demand, we should have no Water left for
our other Customers.French.Que voulez vous que je fasse donc?
Vat must I do den, Sir?Aesop.Marry the Lady as soon as you can,
pay your Debts with Part of her Portion,
drink the Water to forget your Extravagance,
retire with her to your own Country, and be
a better Oeconomist for the future.French.Go to my own Contré!—Je vous
demande Pardon, I had much rather stay
vere I am; I cannot go dere, upon my
Vard—Aesop.Why not, my Friend?French.Entre nous, I had much rather
pass for one French Marquis in Inglande,
keep bonne Compagnie, manger des Delicatesses,
and do noting at all; than keep a Shop
en Provence, couper and frisser les Cheveux,
and live upon Soupe and Sallade the rest of
my Life—Aesop.I cannot blame you for your Choice,
and if other People are so blind not to distinguish
the Barber from the fine Gentleman,
their Folly must be their Punishment—
Therefore, go to the rest of the Company,
and you shall take the Benefit of the Water
with them.French.Monsieur Aesope, sans Flatterie ou
Compliments, I am your very humble Serviteur—
Jean Frisseron en Provence, ou le
Marquis de Poulville en Angleterre.[Exit Frenchman.Aesop.Shield me and defend me! another
fine Lady!Enter Mrs. Riot.Mrs. Riot.A Monster! a filthy Brute!
your Watermen are as unpolite upon the Styx
as upon the Thames—Stow a Lady of Fashion
with Tradesmen's Wives and Mechanics—
Ah! what's this, Serbeerus or Plutus![seeing
Aesop] am I to be frighted with all the Monsters
of this internal World.Aesop.What is the Matter, Lady?Mrs. Riot.Every thing is the matter, my
Spirits are uncompos'd, and every Circumstance
about me in a perfect Dilemma.Aesop.What has disorder'd you thus?Mrs. Riot.Your filthy Boatman, Scarroon,
there.Aesop.Charon, Lady, you mean.Mrs. Riot.And who are you? you ugly
Creature you; if I see any more of you, I
shall die with Temerity.Aesop.The Wise think me handsome,
Madam.Mrs. Riot.I hate the Wise; but who are
you?Aesop.I am Aesop, Madam, honour'd this
Day by Proserpine with the Distribution of
the Waters of Lethe; command me.Mrs. Riot.Shew me to the Pump Room
then, Fellow—where's the Company—I
die in Solitude.Aesop.What Company?Mrs. Riot.The best Company, People of
Fashion! the Beau Monde! shew me to none
of your gloomy Souls, who wander about in
your Groves and Streams—shew me to glittering
Balls, enchanting Masquerades, ravishing
Operas, and all the polite Enjoyments of
Elysian.Aesop.This is a Language unknown to
me, Lady—No such fine Doings here, and
very little good Company (as you call it) in
Elysium—Mrs. Riot.What! no Operas! eh! no
Elysian then! [Sings fantastically in Italian.]
'Sfortunato Monticelli! banish'd Elysian, as

well as the Hay-Market! Your Taste here,
I suppose, rises no higher than your Shakespears
and your Johnsons; oh you Goats and
Vandils! in the Name of Barbarity take 'em
to yourselves, we are tir'd of 'em upon
Earth—one goes indeed to a Playhouse sometimes,
because one does not know how else
one can kill one's Time—every body goes, because
—because—all the World's there—but
for my part—call Scarroon, and let him take
me back again, I'll stay no longer here—
stupid Immortals!Aesop.You are a happy Woman, that have
neither Cares nor Follies to disturb you.Mrs. Riot.Cares! ha! ha! ha! Nay, now
I must laugh in your ugly Face, my Dear:
What Cares, does your Wisdom think, can
enter into the Circle of a fine Lady's Enjoyments?Aesop.By the Account I have just heard
of a fine Lady's Life, her very Pleasures are
both Follies and Cares; so drink the Water,
and forget them, Madam.Mrs. Riot.Oh gad! that was so like my
Husband now—forget my Follies! forget the
Fashion, forget my Being, the very Quincettence
and Emptity of a fine Lady! the Fellow
wou'd make me as great a Brute as my
Husband.Aesop.You have an Husband then, Madam?Mrs. Riot.Yes—I think so—an Husband
and no Husband—Come, fetch me some of
your Water; if I must forget something, I
had as good forget him, for he's grown insufferable
o'late.Aesop.I thought, Madam, you had nothing
to complain of—Mrs. Riot.One's Husband, you know, is
almost next to nothing.Aesop.How has he offended you?Mrs. Riot.The Man talks of nothing but
his Money, and my Extravagance—won't remove
out of the filthy City, tho' he knows I
die for the other End of the Town; nor
leave off his nasty Merchandizing, tho' I've
labour'd to convince him, he loses Money
by it. The Man was once tolerable enough,
and let me have Money when I wanted it;
but now he's never out of a Tavern, and is
grown so valiant, that, do you know—he
has presum'd to contradict me, and refuse
me Money upon every Occasion.Aesop.And all this without any Provocation
on your Side?Mrs. Riot.Laud! how shou'd I provoke
him? I seldom see him, very seldom speak
to the Creature, unless I want Money; besides,
he's out all Day—Aesop.And you all Night, Madam; Is it
not so?Mrs. Riot.I keep the best Company, Sir,
and Day-light is no agreeable Sight to a polite

Assembly; the Sun is very well and comfortable,
to be sure, for the lower Part of the
Creation; but to Ladies who have a true
Taste of Pleasure, Wax Candles, or no Candles,
are preferable to all the Sun-beams in
the Universe—Aesop.Preposterous Fancy!Mrs. Riot.And so, most delicate sweet
Sir, you don't approve my Scheme; ha! ha!
ha!—oh you ugly Devil you! have you the
Vanity to imagine People of Fashion will
mind what you say; or that to learn Politeness
and Breeding, it is necessary to take a
Lesson of Morality out of Aesop's Fables—
ha! ha! ha.Aesop.It is necessary to get a little Reflection
some where; when these Spirits leave
you, and your Senses are surfeited, what must
be the Consequence?—Mrs. Riot.Oh, I have the best Receipt in
the World for the Vapours; and lest the
Poison of your Precepts shou'd taint my Vivacity,
I must beg leave to take it now, by
way of Anecdote.Aesop.Oh, by all means—Ignorance, and
Vanity!Mrs. Riot.(Drawing out a Card) Lady
Rantan's Compliments to Mrs. Riot.SONG.I.The Card invites, in Crouds we flyTo join the jovial Rout, full Cry;What Joy from Cares and Plagues all Day,To hie to the Midnight Hark-away.II.Nor Want, nor Pain, nor Grief, nor Care,Nor dronish Husbands enter there;The Brisk, the Bold, the Young and Gay,All hie to the Midnight Hark-away.III.Uncounted strikes the Morning Clock,And drowsy Watchmen idly knock;Till Day-light peeps, we sport and play,And roar to the jolly Hark-away.IV.When tir'd with Sport, to Bed we creep,And kill the tedious Day with Sleep;To-morrow's welcome Call obey,And again to the Midnight Hark-away.Mrs. Riot.There's a Life for you, you old
Fright! so trouble your Head no more about
your Betters—I am so perfectly satisfied with
myself, that I will not alter an Atom of
me, for all you can say; so you may bottle
up your philosophical Waters for your own
Use, or for the Fools that want 'em—Gad's,
my Life! there's Billy Butterfly in the Grove
—I must go to him—we shall so railly your
Wisdom between us—ha, ha, ha.The Brisk, the Bold, the Young, the Gay,All hie to the Midnight Hark-away.[Exit singing.Aesop.Unhappy Woman! nothing can retrieve
her; when the Head has once a wrong
Bias, 'tis ever obstinate, in proportion to it's
Weakness: But here comes one who seems
to have no Occasion for Lethe to make him
more happy than he is.Enter Drunken Man, and Taylor.D. Man.Come along Neighbour Snip, come
along Taylor; don't be afraid of Hell before
you die, you sniv'ling Dog you.Taylor.For Heaven's sake Mr. Riot, don't
be so boisterous with me, lest we should offend
the Powers below.Aesop.What in the name of Ridicule have
we here!—So, Sir, what are you?D. Man.Drunk,—very drunk, at your
Service.Aesop.That's a piece of Information I did
not want.D. Man.And yet it's all the Information I
can give you.Aesop.Pray, Sir, what brought you hither?D. Man.Curiosity, and a Hackney Coach.Aesop.I mean, Sir, have you any Occasion
for my Waters?D. Man.Yes, great Occasion; if you'll do
me the Favour to qualify them with some
good Arrack and Orange Juice.Aesop.Sir!D. Man.Sir!—Don't stare so, old Gentleman—
let us have a little Conversation with
you.Aesop.I wou'd know if you have any
thing oppresses your Mind, and makes you
unhappy?D. Man.You are certainly a very great
Fool, old Gentleman; did you ever know a
Man drunk and unhappy at the same?Aesop.Never otherwise, for a Man who
has lost his Senses—D. Man.Has lost the most troublesome
Companions in the World, next to Wives
and Bum-Bailiffs.Aesop.But, pray, what is your Business
with me?D. Man.Only to demonstrate to you that
you are an Ass—Aesop.Your humble Servant.D. Man.And to shew you, that whilst I
can get such Liquor as I have been drinking
all Night, I shall never come for your
Water Specificks against Care and Tribulation:
However, old Gentleman, if you'll
do one thing for me, I shan't think my
Time and Conversation thrown away upon
you.Aesop.Any thing in my Power.D. Man.Why, then, here's a small Matter
for you; and, do you hear me? Get me
one of the best Whores in your Territories.Aesop.What do you mean?D. Man.To refresh myself in the Shades
here after my Journey.—Suppose now you
introduce me to Proserpine, who knows how
far my Figure and Address may tempt her;
and if her Majesty is over nice, shew me but
her Maids of Honour, and I'll warrant you
they'll snap at a Bit of fresh Mortality.Aesop.Monstrous!D. Man.Well, well, if it is monstrous, I
say no more—if her Majesty and Retinue
are so very virtuous—I say no more;—but
I'll tell you what, old Friend, if you'll lend
me your Wife for half an Hour; when you
make a Visit above, you shall have mine as
long as you please; and if upon Trial you
shou'd like mine better than your own, you
shall carry her away to the Devil with you,
and ten thousand Thanks into the Bargain.Aesop.This is not to be born; either be
silent, or you'll repent this drunken Insolence.D. Man.What a cross old Fool it is—I
presume, Sir, from the Information of your
Hump, and your Wisdom, that your Name
is—is—what the Devil is it?Aesop.Aesop, at your Service—D. Man.The same, the same—I knew
you well enough, you old sensible Pimp
you—many a time has my Flesh felt Birch
upon your account; prithee, what possess'd
thee to write such foolish old Stories of a Cock
and a Bull, and I don't know what, to plague
poor innocent Lads with! It was damn'd
cruel in you, let me tell you that.Aesop.I am now convinc'd, Sir, I have
written 'em to very little Purpose.D. Man.To very little, I assure you—But
never mind it—Damn it, you are a fine old
Grecian, for all that [claps him on the Back]
come here, Snip—is not he a fine old Grecian?
—And tho' he is not the handsomest,
or best dress'd Man in the World, he has ten
times more Sense than either you or I have—Tay.Pray, Neighbour, introduce me.D. Man.I'll do it—Mr. Aesop, this sneaking
Gentleman is my Taylor, and an honest
Man he was, while he lov'd his Bottle, but
since he turn'd Methodist, and took to Preaching,
he has cabbag'd one Yard in six from all

his Customers; now you know him, hear what
he has to say, while I go and pick up in the
Wood here—Upon my Soul, you are a fine
old Grecian![Exit D. Man.Aesop.[To Taylor.] Come, Friend, don't
be dejected; what is your Business?Tay.I am troubled in Mind.Aesop.Is your Case particular, Friend?Tay.No, indeed, I believe it is pretty general
in our Parish.Aesop.What is it? speak out, Friend—Tay.It runs continually in my Head, that
I am—Aesop.What?Tay.A Cuckold—Aesop.Have a care, Friend, Jealousy is a
rank Weed, and chiefly takes Root in a barren
Soil.Tay.I am sure my Head is full of nothing
else—Aesop.But how came you to a Knowledge
of your Misfortune? has not your Wife as
much Wit as you?Tay.A great deal more, Sir, and that is
one Reason for my believing myself dishonour'd—Aesop.Tho' your Reason has some Weight
in it, yet it does not amount to a Conviction.Tay.I have more to say for myself, if your
Worship will but hear me.Aesop.I shall attend to you.Tay.My Wife has such very High Blood
in her, that she is lately turn'd Papist, and
is always railing at me and the Government—
The Priest and she are continually
laying their Heads together, and I am afraid
he has persuaded her, that it will save her
precious Soul, if she cuckolds a Heretick Taylor—Aesop.Oh, don't think so hardly of 'em.Tay.Lord, Sir, you don't know what
Tricks are going forward above; Religion,
indeed, is the Outside Stuff, but Wickedness
is the Lining.Aesop.Why, you are in a Passion, Friend,
if you would but exert yourself thus at a
proper Time, you might keep the Fox from
your Poultry.Tay.Lord, Sir, my Wife has as much
Passion again as I have; and whenever she's
up, I curb my Temper, sit down, and say
nothing.Aesop.What Remedy have you to propose
for this Misfortune?Tay.I would propose to dip my Head in
the River, to wash away my Fancies—and if
you'll let me take a few Bottles to my Wife,
if the Water is of a cooling Nature, I may
perhaps be easy that Way; but I shall do as
your Worship pleases.Aesop.I am afraid this Method won't answer,
Friend; suppose therefore you drink to
forget your Suspicions, for they are nothing
more, and let your Wife drink to forget your
Uneasiness—A mutual Confidence will succeed,
and consequently, mutual Happiness.Tay.I have such a Spirit, I can never bear
to be dishonour'd in my Bed.Aesop.The Water will cool your Spirit,
and if it can but lower your Wife's, the Business
is done.—Go for a Moment to your
Companion, and you shall drink presently;
but do nothing rashly.Tay.I can't help it, Rashness is my Fault,
Sir; but Age and more Experience, I hope,
will cure me—Your Servant, Sir—Indeed he
is a fine old Grecian.[Exit Taylor.Aesop.Poor Fellow, I pity him.Enter Mercury.Mer.What can be the Meaning, Aesop,
that there are no more Mortals coming over;
I perceive there is a great Bustle on the other
Side the Styx, and Charon has brought his
Boat over without Passengers.Aesop.Here he is to answer for himself.
Enter Charon, laughing.Cha.Oh! oh! oh!Mer.What diverts you so, Charon?Cha.Why there's the Devil to do among
the Mortals yonder; they are all together by
the Ears.Aesop.What's the Matter?Cha.There are some Ladies, who have
been disputing so long and so loud about
taking Place and Precedency, that they have
set their Relations a tilting at one another, to
support their Vanity: The Standers-by
are
some of them so frighted, and some of them
so diverted at the Quarrel, that they have not
time to think of their Misfortunes; so I e'en
left them to settle their Prerogatives by themselves,
and be Friends at their leisure.Mer.What's to be done, Aesop?Aesop.Discharge these we have, and finish
the Business of the Day.Enter Drunken Man and Mrs. Riot.D. Man.I never went to pick up a Whore
in my Life, but the first Woman I laid hold
of, was my dear virtuous Wife, and here
she is—Aesop.Is that Lady your Wife?D. Man.Yes, Sir; and yours, if you
please to accept of her—Aesop.Tho' she has formerly given too
much into fashionable Follies, she now repents,
and will be more prudent for the future.D. Man.Look ye, Mr. Aesop, all your
Preaching and Morality signifies nothing at
all—but since your Wisdom seems bent upon
our Reformation, I'll tell you the only Way,
old Boy, to bring it about. Let me have
enough of your Water to settle my Head, and
throw Madam into the River.Aesop.'Tis in vain to reason with such Beings,
therefore, Mercury, summon the Mortals
from the Grove, and we'll dismiss 'em
to Earth, as happy as Lethe can make 'em—SONG,By MERCURY.I.Come Mortals, come, come follow me,Come follow, follow, follow me,To Mirth, and Joy, and Jollity;Hark, hark, the Call, come, come and drink,And leave your Cares by Lethe's Brink.CHORUS.Away then come, come, come away,And Life shall hence be Holliday;Nor jealous Fears, nor Strife, nor Pain,Shall vex the jovial Heart again.II.To Lethe's Brink then follow all,Then follow, follow, follow all,'Tis Pleasure courts, obey the Call;And Mirth, and Jollity, and Joy,Shall every future Hour employ.CHORUS.Away then come, come, come away,And Life shall hence be Holliday;Nor jealous Fears, nor Strife, nor Pain,Shall vex the jovial Heart again.(During the Song, the Characters enter
from the Grove.)Aesop.Now Mortals attend; I have perceiv'd
from your Examinations, that you
have mistaken the Effect of your Distempers

for the Cause—you wou'd willingly be
relieved from many Things which interfere
with your Passions, and Affections, while
your Vices, from which all your Cares and
Misfortunes arise, are totally forgotten and
neglected—Then follow me, and drink to
the Forgetfulness of Vice—'Tis Vice alone, disturbs the human Breast;Care dies with Guilt; be virtuous, and be blest.FINIS.BOOKS lately published by P. VAILLANT.I. THE Lying Valet, a Comedy, in two
Acts. By Mr. Garrick, 8vo.II Regulus, a Tragedy. By Mr. Havard,
8vo.III. Amyntor and Theodora; or the Hermit:
A Poem, in three Canto's. By Mr.
Mallet.IV. Retirement; an Epistle. By Mr. Potter,
4to.V. Pharsalia and Philippi; or the two
Philippi in Virgil's Georgies, attempted to
be explained and reconciled to History, and
all the ancient Poets and Historians vindicated
from the Aspersions thrown on them by
several Critics, on account of their supposed
Disagreement with regard to those Battles.
By Mr. Holdsworth.VI. Three Treatises; the first concerning
Art; the second concerning Music, Painting,
and Poetry; the third concerning Happiness.
By J. H. 8vo.VII. The Natural History of Bees: Containing
an Account of their Production, their
Oeonomy, the Manner of their making Wax
and Honey, and the best Methods for the
Improvement and Preservation of them. Illustrated
with twelve Copper-Plates, 8vo.