THE
RIVALS,
A
COMEDY.[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]THE
RIVALS,
A
COMEDY. As it is ACTED at the
Theatre-Royal in Covent-Garden.LONDON:
Printed for JOHN WILKIE, No. 71, St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCCLXXV.PREFACE.A Preface to a Play seems generally to be
considered as a kind of Closet-prologue,
in which—if his Piece has been successful—the
Author solicits that indulgence from
the Reader which he had before experienced
from the Audience: But as the scope and immediate
object of a Play is to please a mixed
assembly in Representation (whose judgment
in the Theatre at least is decisive) its degree
of reputation is usually as determined as public,
before it can be prepared for the cooler
tribunal of the Study. Thus any farther solicitude
on the part of the Writer becomes
unnecessary at least, if not an intrusion: and
if the Piece has been condemned in the Performance,
I fear an Address to the Closet,
like an Appeal to Posterity, is constantly regarded
as the procrastination of a suit, from
a consciousness of the weakness of the cause.
From these considerations, the following Comedy
would certainly have been submitted to
the Reader, without any further introduction
than what it had in the Representation, but
that its success has probably been founded on
a circumstance which the Author is informed
has not before attended a theatrical trial, and

which consequently ought not to pass unnoticed.I need scarcely add, that the circumstance
alluded to, was the withdrawing of the Piece,
to remove those imperfections in the first Representation
which were too obvious to escape
reprehension, and too numerous to admit of
a hasty correction. There are few writers, I
believe, who, even in the fullest consciousness
of error, do not wish to palliate the faults
which they acknowledge; and, however trifling
the performance, to second their confession
of its deficiencies, by whatever plea seems least
disgraceful to their ability. In the present
instance, it cannot be said to amount either
to candour or modesty in me, to acknowledge
an extreme inexperience and want of judgment
on matters, in which, without guidance
from practice, or spur from success, a young
man should scarcely boast of being an adept.
If it be said, that under such disadvantages no
one should attempt to write a play—I must
beg leave to dissent from the position, while
the first point of experience that I have gained
on the subject is, a knowledge of the candour
and judgment with which an impartial
Public distinguishes between the errors
of inexperience and incapacity, and the indulgence
which it shews even to a disposition to
remedy the defects of either.It were unnecessary to enter into any farther
extenuation of what was thought exceptionable
in this Play, but that it has been

said, that the Managers should have prevented
some of the defects before its appearance
to the Public—and in particular the uncommon
length of the piece as represented
the first night.—It were an ill return for the
most liberal and gentlemanly conduct on their
side, to suffer any censure to rest where none
was deserved. Hurry in writing has long
been exploded as an excuse for an Author;—
however, in the dramatic line, it may happen,
that both an Author and a Manager may wish
to fill a chasm in the entertainment of the
Public with a hastiness not altogether culpable.
The season was advanced when I first
put the play into Mr. Harris's hands:—it was
at that time at least double the length of any
acting comedy.—I profited by his judgment
and experience in the curtailing of it—'till, I believe,
his feeling for the vanity of a young Author
got the better of his desire for correctness,
and he left many excrescences remaining, because
he had assisted in pruning so many more.
Hence, though I was not uninformed that the
Acts were still too long, I flatter'd myself that,
after the first trial, I might with safer judgment
proceed to remove what should appear to have
been most dissatisfactory.—Many other errors
there were, which might in part have arisen
from my being by no means conversant with
plays in general, either in reading or at the
theatre.—Yet I own that, in one respect, I did
not regret my ignorance: for as my first wish
in attempting a Play, was to avoid every appearance

of plagiary, I thought I should stand
a better chance of effecting this from being in
a walk which I had not frequented, and where
consequently the progress of invention was
less likely to be interrupted by starts of recollection:
for on subjects on which the mind
has been much informed, invention is slow of
exerting itself.—Faded ideas float in the fancy
like half-forgotten dreams; and the imagination
in its fullest enjoyments becomes suspicious
of its offspring, and doubts whether it
has created or adopted.With regard to some particular passages
which on the First Night's Representation
seemed generally disliked, I confess, that if
I felt any emotion of surprise at the disapprobation,
it was not that they were disapproved
of, but that I had not before perceived
that they deserved it. As some part
of the attack on the Piece was begun too early
to pass for the sentence of Judgment, which
is ever tardy in condemning, it has been suggested
to me, that much of the disapprobation
must have arisen from virulence of Malice,
rather than severity of Criticism: But
as I was more apprehensive of there being
just grounds to excite the latter, than conscious
of having deserved the former, I continue
not to believe that probable, which I am sure
must have been unprovoked. However, if it
was so, and I could even mark the quarter
from whence it came, it would be ungenerous
to retort; for no passion suffers more than

malice from disappointment. For my own
part, I see no reason why the Author of a
Play should not regard a First Night's Audience,
as a candid and judicious friend attending,
in behalf of the Public, at his last Rehearsal.
If he can dispense with flattery, he
is sure at least of sincerity, and even though
the annotation be rude, he may rely upon the
justness of the comment. Considered in this
light, that Audience, whose fiat is essential
to the Poet's claim, whether his object be
Fame or Profit, has surely a right to expect
some deference to its opinion, from principles
of Politeness at least, if not from Gratitude.As for the little puny Critics, who scatter
their peevish strictures in private circles, and
scribble at every Author who has the eminence
of being unconnected with them, as
they are usually spleen-swoln from a vain idea
of increasing their consequence, there will
always be found a petulance and illiberality in
their remarks, which should place them as far
beneath the notice of a Gentleman, as their
original dulness had sunk them from the
level of the most unsuccessful Author.It is not without pleasure that I catch at
an opportunity of justifying myself from the
charge of intending any national reflection in
the character of Sir Lucius O'Trigger. If any
Gentlemen opposed the Piece from that idea,
I thank them sincerely for their opposition;
and if the condemnation of this Comedy
(however misconceived the provocation,) could

have added one spark to the decaying flame
of national attachment to the country supposed
to be reflected on, I should have been
happy in its fate; and might with truth have
boasted, that it had done more real service in
its failure, than the successful morality of a
thousand stage-novels will ever effect.It is usual, I believe, to thank the Performers
in a new Play, for the exertion of
their several abilities. But where (as in this
instance) their merit has been so striking and
uncontroverted, as to call for the warmest and
truest applause from a number of judicious
Audiences, the Poet's after-praise comes like
the feeble acclamation of a child to close the
shouts of a multitude. The conduct, however,
of the Principals in a Theatre cannot be
so apparent to the Public.—I think it therefore
but justice to declare, that from this
Theatre (the only one I can speak of from experience,)
those Writers who wish to try the
Dramatic Line, will meet with that candour
and liberal attention, which are generally allowed
to be better calculated to lead genius
into excellence, than either the precepts of
judgment, or the guidance of experience.THE AUTHOR.PROLOGUE.BY THE AUTHOR.Spoken by Mr. WOODWARD and
Mr. QUICK.Enter Serjeant at Law, and Attorney.Serj.WHAT's here!—a vile cramp hand! I cannot
seeWithout my spectacles. Att. He means his fee.Nay, Mr. Serjeant, good Sir, try again.[Gives money.Serj.The scrawl improves [more] O come, 'tis pretty
plain.How's this! The Poet's Brief again! O ho!Cast, I suppose? Att. O pardon me—No—No—We found the Court, o'erlooking stricter laws,Indulgent to the merits of the Cause;By Judges mild, unus'd to harsh denial,A Rule was granted for another trial.Serj.Then heark'ee, Dibble, did you mend your Pleadings,Errors, no few, we've found in our Proceedings.Att.Come, courage, Sir, we did amend our Plea,Hence your new Brief, and this refreshing Fee.Some Sons of Phoebus—in the Courts we meet,Serj.And fifty Sons of Phoebus in the Fleet!Att.Nor pleads he worse, who with a decent sprigOf Bays—adorns his legal waste of wig.Serj.Full-bottom'd Heroes thus, on signs, unsurlA leaf of laurel—in a grove of curl!
Yet tell your Client, that, in adverse days,This Wig is warmer than a bush of Bays.Att.Do you then, Sir, my Client's place supply,Profuse of robe, and prodigal of tye—Do you, with all those blushing pow'rs of face,And wonted bashful hesitating grace,Rise in the Court, and flourish on the Case.[Exit.Serj.For practice then suppose—this Brief will
shew it,—Me, Serjeant Woodward,—Council for the Poet.Us'd to the ground—I know 'tis hard to dealWith this dread Court, from whence there's no appeal;No Tricking here, to blunt the edge of Law,Or, damn'd in Equity—escape by Flaw:But Judgment given—your Sentence must remain;—No Writ of Error lies—to Drury-lane!Yet when so kind you seem—'tis past disputeWe gain some favour, if not Costs of Suit.No spleen is here! I see no hoarded fury;—I think I never fac'd a milder Jury!Sad else our plight!—where frowns are transportation,A hiss the gallows,—and a groan, damnation!But such the public candour, without fearMy Client waves all right of challenge here.No Newsman from our Session is dismiss'd,Nor Wit nor Critic we scratch off the list;His faults can never hurt another's ease,His crime at worst—a bad attempt to please:Thus, all respecting, he appeals to all,And by the general voice will stand or fall.EPILOGUE.BY THE AUTHOR.Spoken by Mrs. BULKLEY.LADIES for You—I heard our Poet say—He'd try to coax some Moral from his Play:' One moral's plain—cried I—without more fuss;' Man's social happiness all rests on Us—' Thro' all the Drama—whether d—n'd or not—' Love gilds the Scene, and Women guide the plot.' From ev'ry rank—obedience is our due—' D'ye doubt?—The world's great stage shall prove it true.The Cit—well skill'd to shun domestic strife—Will sup abroad;—but first—he'll ask his wife:John Trot, his friend—for once, will do the same,But then—he'll just step home to tell my dame.—The surly 'Squire—at noon resolves to rule,And half the day—zounds! Madam is a fool!Convinc'd at night—the vanquish'd Victor says,Ah! Kate! you women have such coaxing ways!—The jolly Toper chides each tardy blade,—Till reeling Bacchus calls on Love for aid:Then with each Toast, he sees fair bumpers swim,And kisses Chloe on the sparkling Brim!Nay, I have heard that Statesmen—great and wise—Will sometimes counsel with a Lady's eyes;The servile suitors—watch her various face,She smiles perferment—or she frowns disgrace,Curtsies a pension here—there nods a place.Nor with less awe, in scenes of humbler life,Is view'd the mistress, or is heard the wife.
The poorest Peasant of the poorest soil,The child of Poverty, and heir to Toil—Early from radiant Love's impartial light,Steals one small spark, to cheer his world of night:Dear spark!—that oft thro' winter's chilling woes,Is all the warmth his little cottage knows!The wand'ring Tar—who, not for years, has press'dThe widow'd Partner of his day of rest—On the cold deck—far from her arms remov'd—Still hums the ditty which his Susan lov'd:And while around the cadence rude is blown,The Boatswain whistles in a softer tone.The Soldier, fairly proud of wounds and toil,Pants for the triumph of his Nancy's smile;But ere the battle should he list' her cries,The Lover trembles—and the Hero dies!That heart, by war and honour steel'd to fear,Droops on a sigh, and sickens at a tear!But Ye more cautious—ye nice judging few,Who give to Beauty only Beauty's due,Tho' friends to Love—Ye view with deep regretOur conquests marr'd—our triumphs incomplete,'Till polish'd Wit more lasting charms disclose,And Judgment fix the darts which Beauty throws!—In female breasts did Sense and Merit rule,The Lover's mind would ask no other school;Sham'd into sense—the Scholars of our eyes,Our Beaux from Gallantry would soon be wise;Would gladly light, their homage to improve,The Lamp of Knowledge at the Torch of Love!ERRATA.Page 40. l. 21. For regiment read regimentals.——25. For Anguish read Languish.Dramatis Personae.MEN.Sir Anthony Absolute, Mr. SHUTER.Capt. Absolute, Mr. WOODWARD.Faulkland, Mr. LEWES.Acres, Mr. QUICK.Sir Lucius O'Trigger, Mr. CLINCH.Fag, Mr. LEE-LEWIS.David, Mr. DUNSTAL.Coachman, Mr. FEARON.WOMEN.Mrs. Malaprop, Mrs. GREEN.Lydia Languish, Miss BARSANTI.Julia, Mrs. BULKLEY.Lucy. Mrs. LESSINGHAM.Maid, Boy, Servants, &c.SCENE, Bath.TIME of ACTION, Five Hours.THE
RIVALS.ACT I.SCENE I.A STREEET in Bath.Coachman crosses the stage.—Enter Fag, looking
after him.Fag.WHAT!—Thomas!—Sure 'tis he?—
What!—Thomas!—Thomas!Coach.Hay!—Odd's life!—Mr. Fag!—give us
your hand, my old fellow-servant.Fag.Excuse my glove, Thomas:—I'm dev'lish
glad to see you, my lad: why, my prince of charioteers,
you look as hearty!—but who the deuce
thought of seeing you in Bath!Coach.Sure, Master, Madam Julia, Harry, Mrs.
Kate, and the postillion be all come!Fag.Indeed!Coach.Aye! Master thought another fit of the
gout was coming to make him a visit:—so he'd a
mind to gi't the slip, and whip we were all off at
an hour's warning.Fag.Aye, aye! hasty in every thing, or it would
not be Sir Anthony Absolute!Coach.But tell us, Mr. Fag, how does young
Master? Odd! Sir Anthony will stare to see the
Captain here!Fag.I do not serve Capt. Absolute now.—Coach.Why sure!Fag.At present I am employ'd by Ensign Beverley.Coach.I doubt, Mr. Fag, you ha'n't changed
for the better.Fag.I have not changed, Thomas.Coach.No! why didn't you say you had left
young Master?Fag.No—Well, honest Thomas, I must
puzzle you no farther:—briefly then—Capt. Absolute
and Ensign Beverley are one and the same
person.Coach.The devil they are!Fag.So it is indeed, Thomas; and the Ensign
half of my master being on guard at present—the
Captain has nothing to do with me.Coach.So, so!—what, this is some freak, I warrant!—Do,
tell us, Mr. Fag, the meaning o't—you
know I ha' trusted you.Fag.You'll be secret, Thomas.Coach.As a coach-horse.Fag.Why then the cause of all this is—LOVE,—
Love, Thomas, who (as you may get read to you) has
been a masquerader ever since the days of Jupiter.Coach.Aye, aye;—I guessed there was a lady
in the case:—but pray, why does your Master pass
only for Ensign?—now if he had shamm'd General
indeed—Fag.Ah! Thomas, there lies the mystery o'the
matter.—Hark'ee, Thomas, my Master is in love
with a lady of a very singular taste: a lady who
likes him better as a half-pay Ensign than if she
knew he was son and heir to Sir Anthony Absolute,
a baronet with three thousand a-year!Coach.That is an odd taste indeed!—but has
she got the stuff, Mr. Fag; is she rich, hey?Fag.Rich!—why, I believe she owns half the
stocks!—Z—ds! Thomas, she could pay the
national debt as easy as I could my washerwoman!
—She has a lap-dog that eats out of gold,—she
feeds her parrot with small pearls,—and all her
thread-papers are made of bank-notes!Coach.Bravo!—faith!—Odd! I warrant she
has a set of thousands at least:—but does she
draw kindly with the Captain?Fag.As fond as pigeons.Coach.May one hear her name?Fag.Miss Lydia Languish—But there is an old
tough aunt in the way;—though by the bye—she
has never seen my Master—for he got acquainted
with Miss while on a visit in Gloucestershire.Coach.Well—I wish they were once harness'd
together in matrimony.—But pray, Mr. Fag, what
kind of a place is this Bath?—I ha' heard a deal
of it—here's a mort o' merry-making—hey?Fag.Pretty well, Thomas, pretty well—'tis a
good lounge. Though at present we are, like
other great assemblies, divided into parties—Highroomians
and Low-roomians; however, for my part,
I have resolved to stand neuter; and so I told Bob
Brush at our last committee.Coach.But what do the folks do here?Fag.Oh! there are little amusements enough—
in the morning we go to the pump-room (though
neither my Master nor I drink the waters); after
breakfast we saunter on the parades or play a
game at billiards; at night we dance: but d—n
the place, I'm tired of it: their regular hours
stupify me—not a fiddle nor a card after eleven!
—however Mr. Faulkland's gentleman and I keep
it up a little in private parties;—I'll introduce you
there, Thomas—you'll like him much.Coach.Sure I know Mr. Du-Peigne—you know
his Master is to marry Madam Julia.Fag.I had forgot.—But Thomas you must polish
a little—indeed you must:—here now—this
wig!—what the devil do you do with a wig, Thomas?—none
of the London whips of any degree
of Ton wear wigs now.Coach.More's the pity! more's the pity, I
say.—Odd's life! when I heard how the lawyers
and doctors had took to their own hair, I thought
how 'twould go next:—Odd rabbit it! when the
fashion had got foot on the Bar, I guess'd 'twould
mount to the Box!—but 'tis all out of character,
believe me, Mr. Fag: and look'ee, I'll never gi' up
mine—the lawyers and doctors may do as they
will.Fag.Well, Thomas, we'll not quarrel about
that.Coach.Why, bless you, the gentlemen of they
professions ben't all of a mind—for in our village
now tho'ff Jack Gauge the exciseman, has ta'en to
his carrots, there's little Dick the farrier swears
he'll never forsake his bob, tho' all the college
should appear with their own heads!Fag.Indeed! well said Dick! but hold—mark!
mark! Thomas.Coach.Zooks! 'tis the Captain—Is that the lady
with him?Fag.No! no! that is Madam Lucy—my
Master's mistress's maid.—They lodge at that
house—but I must after him to tell him the news.Coach.Odd! he's giving her money!—well,
Mr. Fag—Fag.Good bye, Thomas.—I have an appointment
in Gydes' Porch this evening at eight; meet
me there, and we'll make a little party.[Exeunt severally.SCENE II.A Dressing-room in Mrs. Malaprop's lodgings.Lydia sitting on a sopha with a book in her hand.—
Lucy, as just returned from a message.Luc.Indeed, Ma'am, I transferr'd half the town
in search of it:—I don't believe there's a circulating
library in Bath I ha'n't been at.Lyd.And could not you get 'The Reward of
Constancy?'Lucy.No, indeed, Ma'am.Lyd.Nor 'The Fatal Connection?'Lucy.No, indeed, Ma'am.Lyd.Nor 'The Mistakes of the Heart?'Lucy.Ma'am, as ill-luck would have it, Mr. Bull
said Miss Sukey Saunter had just fetch'd it away.Lyd.Heigh-ho!—Did you inquire for 'The
Delicate Distress?'Lucy.—Or 'The Memoirs of Lady Woodford?'
Yes indeed, Ma'am.—I ask'd every where for it;
and I might have brought it from Mr. Frederick's,
but Lady Slattern Lounger, who had just sent it
home, had so soiled and dog's-ear'd it, it wa'n't fit
for a christian to read.Lyd.Heigh-ho!—Yes, I always know when
Lady Slattern has been before me.—She has a most
observing thumb; and I believe cherishes her nails
for the convenience of making marginal notes.—
Well, child, what have you brought me?Lucy.On! here Ma'am.[Taking books from under her cloke, and from
her pockets.]This is 'The Gordian Knot,'—and this 'Peregrine
Pickle.' Here are 'The Tears of Sensibility' and
'Humphry Clinker.' This is 'The Memoirs of a
Lady of Quality, written by herself,'—and here the
second volume of 'The Sentimental Journey.'Lyd.Heigh-ho!—What are those books by the
glass?Lucy.The great one is only 'The whole Duty of
Man'—where I press a few blonds, Ma'am.Lyd.Very well—give me the sal volatile.Lucy.Is it in a blue cover, Ma'am?Lyd.My smelling bottle, you simpleton!Lucy.O, the drops!—here Ma'am.Lyd.No note, Lucy?Lucy.No indeed, Ma'am—but I have seen a
certain person—Lyd.What, my Beverley!—well Lucy?Lucy.O Ma'am! he looks so desponding and
melancholic!Lyd.Hold Lucy!—here's some one coming—
quick, see who it is.—[Exit Lucy.]Surely I heard my cousin Julia's voice![Re-enter Lucy.Lucy.Lud! Ma'am, here is Miss Melville.Lyd.Is it possible!—Enter Julia.Lyd.My dearest Julia, how delighted am I!—
(Embrace) How unexpected was this happiness!Jul.True, Lydia—and our pleasure is the
greater;—but what has been the matter?—you
were denied to me at first!Lyd.Ah! Julia, I have a thousand things to
tell you!—but first inform me, what has conjur'd
you to Bath?—Is Sir Anthony here?Jul.He is—we are arrived within this hour—
and I suppose he will be here to wait on Mrs. Malaprop
as soon as he is dress'd.Lyd.Then before we are interrupted, let me
impart to you some of my distress!—I know your
gentle nature will sympathize with me, tho' your
prudence may condemn me!—My letters have
inform'd you of my whole connexion with Beverley;
—but I have lost him, Julia!—my aunt has discover'd

our intercourse by a note she intercepted,
and has confin'd me ever since!—Yet, would
you believe it? she has fallen absolutely in love
with a tall Irish baronet she met one night since
we have been here, at Lady Macshuffle's rout.Jul.You jest, Lydia!Lyd.No, upon my word.—She absolutely carries
on a kind of correspondence with him, under
a feigned name though, till she chuses to be
known to him;—but it is a Delia or a Celia, I
assure you.Jul.Then, surely, she is now more indulgent to
her niece.Lyd.Quite the contrary. Since she has discovered
her own frailty, she is become more suspicious
of mine. Then I must inform you of
another plague!—That odious Acres is to be in
Bath to-day; so that I protest I shall be teased out
of all spirits!Jul.Come, come, Lydia, hope the best.—Sir
Anthony shall use his interest with Mrs. Malaprop.Lyd.But you have not heard the worst. Unfortunately
I had quarrell'd with my poor Beverley,
just before my aunt made the discovery, and I have
not seen him since, to make it up.Jul.What was his offence?Lyd.Nothing at all!—But, I don't know how it
was, as often as we had been together, we had never
had a quarrel!—And, somehow I was afraid he would
never give me an opportunity.—So, last Thursday,
I wrote a letter to myself, to inform myself that
Beverley was at that time paying his addresses to
another woman.—I sign'd it your Friend unknown,
shew'd it to Beverley, charg'd him with his falsehood,
put myself in a violent passion, and vow'd
I'd never see him more.Jul.And you let him depart so, and have not
seen him since?Lyd.'Twas the next day my aunt found the
matter out. I intended only to have teased him
three days and a half, and now I've lost him for
ever.Jul.If he is as deserving and sincere as you have
representd him to me, he will never give you up
so. Yet consider, Lydia, you tell me he is but an
ensign, and you have thirty thousand pounds!Lyd.But you know I lose most of my fortune,
if I marry without my aunt's consent, till of age;
and that is what I have determin'd to do, ever
since I knew the penalty.—Nor could I love the
man, who would wish to wait a day for the alternative.Jul.Nay, this is caprice!Lyd.What, does Julia tax me with caprice?—
I thought her lover Faulkland had enured her to it.Jul.I do not love even his faults.Lyd.But a-propos—you have sent to him, I
suppose?Jul.Not yet, upon my word—nor has he the
least idea of my being in Bath.—Sir Anthony's resolution
was so sudden, I could not inform him
of it.Lyd.Well, Julia, you are your own mistress,
(though under the protection of Sir Anthony) yet
have you, for this long year, been the slave to the
caprice, the whim, the jealousy of this ungrateful
Faulkland, who will ever delay assuming the right
of a husband, while you suffer him to be equally
imperious as a lover.Jul.Nay, you are wrong entirely.—We were
contracted before my father's death.—That, and
some consequent embarrassments, have delay'd what
I know to be my Faulkland's most ardent wish.—
He is too generous to trifle on such a point.—
And for his character, you wrong him there too.—

No, Lydia, he is too proud, too noble to be jealous;
if he is captious, 'tis without dissembling;
if fretful, without rudeness.—Unus'd to the soppery
of love, he is negligent of the little duties
expected from a lover—but being unhackney'd in
the passion, his love is ardent and sincere; and as
it engrosses his whole soul, he expects every thought
and emotion of his mistress to move in unison with
his.—Yet, though his pride calls for this full return
—his humility makes him undervalue those qualities
in him, which should entitle him to it; and not
feeling why he should be lov'd to the degree he
wishes, he still suspects that he is not lov'd enough:
—This temper, I must own, has cost me many unhappy
hours; but I have learn'd to think myself
his debtor, for those imperfections which arise from
the ardour of his love.Lyd.Well, I cannot blame you for defending
him.—But tell me candidly, Julia, had he never
sav'd your life, do you think you should have been
attach'd to him as you are?—Believe me, the rude
blast that overset your boat was a prosperous gale
of love to him.Jul.Gratitude may have strengthened my attachment
to Mr. Faulkland, but I lov'd him before
he had preserv'd me; yet surely that alone
were an obligation sufficient.Lyd.Obligation!—Why a water-spaniel would
have done as much.—Well, I should never think
of giving my heart to a man because he could
swim!Jul.Come, Lydia, you are too inconsiderate.Lyd.Nay, I do but jest.—What's here?Enter Lucy in a hurry.Lucy.O Ma'am, here is Sir Anthony Absolute
just come home with your aunt.Lyd.They'll not come here.—Lucy do you
watch.[Exit Lucy.Jul.Yet I must go.—Sir Anthony does not
know I am here, and if we meet, he'll detain me,
to shew me the town.—I'll take another opportunity
of paying my respects to Mrs. Malaprop,
when she shall treat me, as long as she chooses,
with her select words so ingeniously misapplied,
without being mispronounced.Re-enter Lucy.Lucy.O Lud! Ma'am, they are both coming
up stairs.Lyd.Well, I'll not detain you Coz.—Adieu,
my dear Julia, I'm sure you are in haste to send
to Faulkland.—There—through my room you'll
find another stair-case.Jul.Adieu.—(Embrace.)[Exit Julia.Lyd.Here, my dear Lucy, hide these books.—
Quick, quick.—Fling Peregrine Pickle under the
toilet—throw Roderick Random in to the closet—put
the Innocent Adultery into The Whole Duty of Man
—thrust Lord Aimworth under the sopha—cram
Ovid behind the bolster—there—put the Man of
Feeling into your pocket—so, so, now lay Mrs.
Chapone in sight, and leave Fordyce's Sermons open
on the table.Lucy.O burn it, Ma'am, the hair-dresser has torn
away as far as Proper Pride.Lyd.Never mind—open at Sobriety.—Fling me
Lord Chesterfield's Letters.—Now for 'em.Enter Mrs. Malaprop and Sir Anthony Absolute.Mrs. Mal.There, Sir Anthony, there sits the
deliberate Simpleton, who wants to disgrace her family,
and lavish herself on a fellow not worth a
shilling!Lyd.Madam, I thought you once—Mrs. Mal.You thought, Miss!—I don't know
any business you have to think at all—thought does
not become a young woman; the point we would
request of you is, that you will promise to forget
this fellow—to illiterate him, I say, quite from
your memory.Lyd.Ah! Madam! our memories are independent
of our wills.—It is not so easy to forget.Mrs. Mal.But I say it is, Miss; there is nothing
on earth so easy as to forget, if a person
chooses to set about it.—I'm sure I have as much
forgot your poor dear uncle as if he had never existed—and
I thought it my duty so to do; and let
me tell you, Lydia, these violent memories don't
become a young woman.Sir Anth.Why sure she won't pretend to remember
what she's order'd not!—aye, this comes
of her reading!Lyd.What crime, Madam, have I committed
to be treated thus?Mrs. Mal.Now don't attempt to extirpate yourself
from the matter; you know I have proof controvertible
of it.—But tell me, will you promise to
do as you're bid?—Will you take a husband of
your friends choosing?Lyd.Madam, I must tell you plainly, that had
I no preference for any one else, the choice you
have made would be my aversion.Mrs. Mal.What business have you, Miss, with
preference and aversion? They don't become a
young woman; and you ought to know, that as
both always wear off, 'tis safest in matrimony to
begin with a little aversion. I am sure I hated your
poor dear uncle before marriage as if he'd been a
black-a-moor—and yet, Miss, you are sensible what
a wife I made!—and when it pleas'd Heav'n to
release me from him, 'tis unknown what tears I
shed!—But suppose we were going to give you

another choice, will you promise us to give up this
Beverley?Lyd.Could I belie my thoughts so far, as to
give that promise, my actions would certainly as
far belie my words.Mrs. Mal.Take yourself to your room.—You
are fit company for nothing but your own ill-humours.Lyd.Willingly, Ma'am—I cannot change for
the worse.[Exit Lydia.Mrs. Mal.There's a little intricate hussy for
you!Sir Anth.It is not to be wonder'd at, Ma'am—
all this is the natural consequence of teaching girls
to read.—Had I a thousand daughters, by Heavens!
I'd as soon have them taught the black-art
as their alphabet!Mrs. Mal.Nay, nay, Sir Anthony, you are an
absolute misanthropy.Sir Anth.In my way hither, Mrs. Malaprop, I
observed your niece's maid coming forth from a
circulating library!—She had a book in each hand
—they were half-bound volumes, with marbled
covers!—From that moment I guess'd how full of
duty I should see her mistress!Mrs. Mal.Those are vile places, indeed!Sir Anth.Madam, a circulating library in a
town is, as an ever-green tree, of diabolical knowledge!—It
blossoms through the year!—And depend
on it, Mrs. Malaprop, that they who are so
fond of handling the leaves, will long for the fruit
at last.Mrs. Mal.Well, but Sir Anthony, your wife,
Lady Absolute, was fond of books.Sir Anth.Aye—and injury sufficient they were
to her, Madam.—But were I to chuse another helpmate,
the extent of her erudition should consist
in her knowing her simple letters, without their

mischievous combinations;—and the summit of
her science be—her ability to count as far as
twenty.—The first, Mrs. Malaprop, would enable
her to work A. A. upon my linen;—and the latter
would be quite sufficient to prevent her giving me
a shirt, No. 1. and a stock, No. 2.Mrs. Mal.Fie, fie, Sir Anthony, you surely speak
laconically!Sir Anth.Why, Mrs. Malaprop, in moderation,
now, what would you have a woman know?Mrs. Mal.Observe me, Sir Anthony.—I would
by no means wish a daughter of mine to be a progeny
of learning; I don't think so much learning
becomes a young woman; for instance—I would
never let her meddle with Greek, or Hebrew, or Algebra,
or Simony, or Fluxions, or Paradoxes, or such
inflammatory branches of learning—neither would
it be necessary for her to handle any of your mathematical,
astronomical, diabolical instruments;—
But, Sir Anthony, I would send her, at nine years
old, to a boarding-school, in order to learn a little
ingenuity and artifice.—Then, Sir, she should
have a supercilious knowledge in accounts;—and
as she grew up, I would have her instructed in
geometry, that she might know something of the
contagious countries;—but above all, Sir Anthony,
she should be mistress of orthodoxy, that she
might not mis-spell, and mis-pronounce words so
shamefully as girls usually do; and likewise that
she might reprehend the true meaning of what she
is saying.—This, Sir Anthony, is what I would
have a woman know;—and I don't think there is
a superstitious article in it.Sir Anth.Well, well, Mrs. Malaprop, I will
dispute the point no further with you; though I
must confess, that you are a truly moderate and polite
arguer, for almost every third word you say is

on my side of the question.—But, Mrs. Malaprop,
to the more important point in debate,—you say,
you have no objection to my proposal.Mrs. Mal.None, I assure you.—I am under no
positive engagement with Mr. Acres, and as Lydia
is so obstinate against him, perhaps your son may
have better success.Sir Anth.Well, Madam, I will write for the
boy directly.—He knows not a syllable of this yet,
though I have for some time had the proposal in
my head. He is at present with his regiment.Mrs. Mal.We have never seen your son, Sir
Anthony; but I hope no objection on his side.Sir Anth.Objection!—let him object if he dare!
—No, no, Mrs. Malaprop, Jack knows that the
least demur puts me in a frenzy directly.—My
process was always very simple—in their younger
days, 'twas 'Jack, do this;'—if he demur'd—I
knock'd him down—and if he grumbled at that—
I always sent him out of the room.Mrs. Mal.Aye, and the properest way, o' my
conscience!—nothing is so conciliating to young
people as severity.—Well, Sir Anthony, I shall
give Mr. Acres his discharge, and prepare Lydia
to receive your son's invocations;—and I hope
you will represent her to the Captain as an object
not altogether illegible.Sir Anth.Madam, I will handle the subject prudently.—Well,
I must leave you—and let me beg
you, Mrs. Malaprop, to enforce this matter roundly
to the girl;—take my advice—keep a tight hand
—if she rejects this proposal—clap her under lock
and key:—and if you were just to let the servants
forget to bring her dinner for three or four days,
you can't conceive how she'd come about![Exit Sir Anth.Mrs. Mal.Well, at any rate I shall be glad to
get her from under my intuition.—She has somehow

discovered my partiality for Sir Lucius O'Trigger—sure,
Lucy can't have betray'd me!—No, the
girl is such a simpleton, I should have made her
confess it.—Lucy!—Lucy!—(calls) Had she been
one of your artificial ones, I should never have
trusted her.Enter Lucy.Lucy.Did you call, Ma'am?Mrs. Mal.Yes, girl.—Did you see Sir Lucius
while you was out?Lucy.No, indeed, Ma'am, not a glimpse of
him.Mrs. Mal.You are sure, Lucy, that you never
mention'd—Lucy.O Gemini! I'd sooner cut my tongue
out.Mrs. Mal.Well, don't let your simplicity be
impos'd on.Lucy.No, Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.So, come to me presently, and I'll
give you another letter to Sir Lucius;—but mind
Lucy—if ever you betray what you are entrusted
with—(unless it be other people's secrets to me)
you forfeit my malevolence for ever:—and your
being a simpleton shall be no excuse for your locality.[Exit Mrs. Malaprop.Lucy.Ha! ha! ha!—So, my dear simplicity, let
me give you a little respite—(altering her manner)
—let girls in my station be as fond as they please
of appearing expert, and knowing in their trusts;
—commend me to a mask of silliness, and a pair
of sharp eyes for my own interest under it!—Let
me see to what account I have turn'd my simplicity
lately—(looks at a paper)For abetting Miss Lydia Languish in a design of running
away with an Ensign!—in money—sundry times—
twelve pound twelve—gowns, five—hats, ruffles, caps,
&c. &c.—numberless!—From the said Ensign, within
this last month, six guineas and a half.—About a quarter's
pay!—Item, from Mrs. Malaprop, for betraying
the young people to her—when I found matters were
likely to be discovered—two guineas, and a black paduasoy.—Item,
from Mr. Acres, for carrying divers
letters—which I never deliver'd—two guineas, and a
pair of buckles.—Item, from Sir Lucius O'Trigger—
three crowns—two gold pocket-pieces—and a silver snuffbox!—Well
done, simplicity!—yet I was forced
to make my Hibernian believe, that he was corresponding,
not with the Aunt, but with the Niece:
for, though not over rich, I found he had too
much pride and delicacy to sacrifice the feelings
of a gentleman to the necessities of his fortune.[Exit.END OF THE FIRST ACT.ACT II.SCENE I.Captain Absolute's Lodgings.Captain Absolute and Fag.Fag.SIR, while I was there, Sir Anthony came
in: I told him, you had sent me to inquire
after his health, and to know if he was at
leisure to see you.Abs.And what did he say, on hearing I was at
Bath?Fag.Sir, in my life I never saw an elderly gentleman
more astonished! He started back two or
three paces, rapt out a dozen interjectoral oaths,
and asked, what the devil had brought you here!Abs.Well, Sir, and what did you say?Fag.O, I lied, Sir—I forgot the precise lie, but
you may depend on't; he got no truth from me.
Yet, with submission, for fear of blunders in future,
I should be glad to fix what has brought us to
Bath: in order that we may lie a little consistently.
—Sir Anthony's servants were curious, Sir, very
curious indeed.Abs.You have said nothing to them—?Fag.O, not a word, Sir—not a word.—Mr.
Thomas, indeed, the coachman (whom I take to
be the discreetest of whips)—Abs.S'death!—you rascal! you have not trusted
him!Fag.O, no, Sir—no—no—not a syllable, upon
my veracity!—He was, indeed, a little inquisitive;
but I was fly, Sir—devilish fly!—My Master (said
I) honest Thomas (you know, Sir, one says honest
to one's inferiors) is come to Bath to recruit—Yes,
Sir—I said, to recruit—and whether for men, money,
or constitution, you know, Sir, is nothing to
him, nor any one else.Abs.Well—recruit will do—let it be so—Fag.O, Sir, recruit will do surprisingly—indeed,
to give the thing an air, I told Thomas, that your
Honour had already inlisted, five disbanded chairmen,
seven minority waiters, and thirteen billiard
markers.Abs.You blockhead, never say more than is
necessary.Fag.I beg pardon, Sir—I beg pardon—But
with submission, a lie is nothing unless one supports
it.—Sir, whenever I draw on my invention
for a good current lie, I always forge indorsements,
as well as the bill.Abs.Well, take care you don't hurt your credit,
by offering too much security.—Is Mr. Faulkland
returned?Fag.He is above, Sir, changing his dress.Abs.Can you tell whether he has been informed
of Sir Anthony's and Miss Melville's arrival?Fag.I fancy not, Sir; he has seen no one since
he came in, but his gentleman, who was with him
at Bristol.—I think, Sir, I hear Mr. Faulkland
coming down—Abs.Go, tell him, I am here.Fag.Yes, Sir—(going) I beg pardon, Sir, but
should Sir Anthony call, you will do me the favour
to remember, that we are recruiting, if you
please.Abs.Well, well.Fag.And in tenderness to my character, if your
Honour could bring in the chairman and waiters,
I shall esteem it as an obligation;—for though I
never scruple a lie to serve my Master, yet it hurts
one's conscience, to be found out.[Exit.Abs.Now for my whimsical friend—if he does
not know that his mistress is here, I'll tease him a
little before I tell him—Enter Faulkland.Faulkland, you're welcome to Bath again; you
are punctual in your return.Faulk.Yes; I had nothing to detain me, when
I had finished the business I went on. Well, what
news since I left you? How stand matters between
you and Lydia?Abs.Faith, much as they were; I have not seen
her since our quarrel, however I expect to be recalled
every hour.Faulk.Why don't you persuade her to go off
with you at once?Abs.What, and lose two thirds of her fortune?
You forget that my friend.—No, no, I could have
brought her to that long ago.Faulk.Nay then, you trifle too long—if you
are sure of her, propose to the aunt in your own
character, and write to Sir Anthony for his consent.Abs.Softly, softly, for though I am convinced
my little Lydia would elope with me as Ensign
Beverley, yet am I by no means certain that she
would take me with the impediment of our friend's
consent, a regular humdrum wedding, and the reversion
of a good fortune on my side; no, no, I
must prepare her gradually for the discovery, and
make myself necessary to her, before I risk it.—
Well, but Faulkland, you'll dine with us to-day at
the Hotel?Faulk.Indeed I cannot: I am not in spirits to
be of such a party.Abs.By Heavens! I shall forswear your company.
You are the most teasing, captious, incorrigible
lover!—Do love like a man.Faulk.I own I am unfit for company.Abs.Am not I a lover; aye, and a romantic
one too? Yet do I carry every where with me such
a confounded farago of doubts, fears, hopes, wishes,
and all the flimsy furniture of a country Miss's brain!Faulk.Ah! Jack, your heart and soul are not,
like mine, fixed immutably on one only object.—
You throw for a large stake, but losing—you
could stake, and throw again:—but I have set my
sum of happiness on this cast, and not to succeed,
were to be stript of all.Abs.But for Heaven's sake! what grounds for
apprehension can your whimsical brain conjure up
at present? Has Julia miss'd writing this last post?
or was her last too tender, or too cool; or too
grave, or too gay; or—Faulk.Nay, nay, Jack.Abs.Why, her love—her honour—her prudence,
you cannot doubt.Faulk.O! upon my soul, I never have;—but
what grounds for apprehension did you say?
Heavens! are there not a thousand! I fear for
her spirits—her health—her life.—My absence may
fret her; her anxiety for my return, her fears for
me, may oppress her gentle temper. And for her
health—does not every hour bring me cause to be
alarmed? If it rains, some shower may even then
have chilled her delicate frame!—If the wind be
keen, some rude blast may have affected her!
The heat of noon, the dews of the evening, may
endanger the life of her, for whom only I value
mine. O! Jack, when delicate and feeling souls
are separated, there is not a feature in the sky, not

a movement of the elements; not an aspiration of
the breeze, but hints some cause for a lover's apprehension!Abs.Aye, but we may choose whether we will
take the hint or no.—Well then, Faulkland, if you
were convinced that Julia was well and in spirits,
you would be entirely content.Faulk.I should be happy beyond measure—
I'm anxious only for that.Abs.Then to cure your anxiety at once—Miss
Melville is in perfect health, and is at this moment
in Bath.Faulk.Nay Jack—don't trifle with me.Abs.She is arrived here with my father within
this hour.Faulk.Can you be serious?Abs.I thought you knew Sir Anthony better
than to be surprised at a sudden whim of this kind.
—Seriously then, it is as I tell you—upon my
honour.Falk.My dear friend!—Hollo, Du-Peigne!
my hat—my dear Jack—now nothing on earth can
give me a moment's uneasiness.Enter Fag.Fag.Sir, Mr. Acres just arrived is below.Abs.Stay, Faulkland, this Acres lives within a
mile of Sir Anthony, and he shall tell you how
your mistress has been ever since you left her.—
Fag, shew the gentleman up.[Exit Fag.Faulk.What, is he much acquainted in the family?Abs.O, very intimate: I insist on your not
going: besides, his character will divert you.Faulk.Well, I should like to ask him a few
questions.Abs.He is likewise a rival of mine—that is of
my other self's, for he does not think his friend

Capt. Absolute ever saw the lady in question;—and
it is ridiculous enough to hear him complain to me
of one Beverley a concealed sculking rival, who—Faulk.Hush!—He's here.Enter Acres.Acres.Hah! my dear friend, noble captain, and
honest Jack, how do'st thou? just arrived faith, as
you see.—Sir, your humble servant. Warm work
on the roads Jack—Odds, whips and wheels, I've
travelled like a Comet, with a tail of dust all the
way as long as the Mall.Abs.Ah! Bob, you are indeed an excentric
Planet, but we know your attraction hither—give
me leave to introduce Mr. Faulkland to you; Mr.
Faulkland, Mr. Acres.Acres.Sir, I am most heartily glad to see you:
Sir, I solicit your connections.—Hey Jack—what
this is Mr. Faulkland, who—Abs.Aye, Bob, Miss Melville's Mr. Faulkland.Acres.Od'so! she and your father can be but
just arrived before me—I suppose you have seen
them.—Ah! Mr. Faulkland, you are indeed a
happy man.Faulk.I have not seen Miss Melville yet, Sir—
I hope she enjoyed full health and spirits in Devonshire.Acres.Never knew her better in my life, Sir,—
never better.—Odd's Blushes and Blooms! she
has been as healthy as the German Spa.Faulk.Indeed!—I did hear that she had been a
little indisposed.Acres.False, false, Sir—only said to vex you:
quite the reverse I assure you.Faulk.There, Jack, you see she has the advantage
of me; I had almost fretted myself ill.Abs.Now are you angry with your mistress for
not having been sick.Faulk.No, no, you misunderstand me:—yet
surely a little trifling indisposition is not an unnatural
consequence of absence from those we love.
—Now confess—isn't there something unkind in
this violent, robust, unfeeling health?Abs.O, it was very unkind of her to be well in
your absence to be sure!Acres.Good apartments, Jack.Faulk.Well Sir, but you were saying that Miss
Melville has been so exceedingly well—what then
she has been merry and gay I suppose?—Always
in spirits—hey?Acres.Merry, Odds Crickets! she has been
the bell and spirit of the company wherever she
has been—so lively and entertaining! so full of
wit and humour!Faulk.There, Jack, there.—O, by my soul!
there is an innate levity in woman, that nothing
can overcome.—What! happy and I away!Abs.Have done: how foolish this is! just now
you were only apprehensive for your mistress's
spirits.Faulk.Why Jack, have I been the joy and spirit
of the company?Abs.No indeed, you have not.Faulk.Have I been lively and entertaining?Abs.O, upon my word, I acquit you.Faulk.Have I been full of wit and humour?Abs.No, faith, to do you justice, you have been
confounded stupid indeed.Acres.What's the matter with the gentleman?Abs.He is only expressing his great satisfaction
at hearing that Julia has been so well and happy—
that's all—hey, Faulkland?Faulk.Oh! I am rejoiced to hear it—yes, yes,
she has a happy disposition!Acres.That she has indeed—then she is so accomplished—so
sweet a voice—so expert at her

Harpsichord—such a mistress of flat and sharp,
squallante, rumblante, and quiverante!—there was
this time month—Odds Minnums and Crotchets!
how she did chirup at Mrs. Piano's Concert.Faulk.There again, what say you to this? you
see she has been all mirth and song—not a thought
of me!Abs.Pho! man, is not music the food of love?Faulk.Well, well, it may be so.—Pray Mr.—
what's his d—d name?—Do you remember what
Songs Miss Melville sung?Acres.Not I, indeed.Abs.Stay now, they were some pretty, melancholy,
purling stream airs, I warrant; perhaps you
may recollect:—did she sing—'When absent from
my soul's delight?'Acres.No, that wa'n't it.Abs.Or—'Go, gentle Gales!'—'Go, gentle
Gales!' (sings.)Acres.O no! nothing like it.—Odds slips?
now I recollect one of them—'My heart's my own,
my will is free.' (sings)Faulk.Fool! fool that I am! to fix all my happiness
on such a trifler! S'death! to make herself
the pipe and ballad-monger of a circle! to sooth
her light heart with catches and glees!—What can
you say to this, Sir?Abs.Why, that I should be glad to hear my
mistress had been so merry, Sir.Faulk.Nay, nay, nay—I am not sorry that she
has been happy—no, no, I am glad of that—I
would not have had her sad or sick—yet surely a
sympathetic heart would have shewn itself even
in the choice of a song—she might have been
temperately healthy, and somehow, plaintively
gay;—but she has been dancing too, I doubt
not!Acres.What does the gentleman say about
dancing?Abs.He says the lady we speak of dances as
well as she sings.Acres.Aye truly, does she—there was at our
last race-ball—Faulk.Hell and the devil! There! there!—I
told you so! I told you so! Oh! she thrives in
my absence!—Dancing!—but her whole feelings
have been in opposition with mine!—I have been
anxious, silent, pensive, sedentary—my days have
been hours of care, my nights of watchfulness.—
She has been all Health! Spirit! Laugh! Song!
Dance!—Oh! d—n'd, d—n'd levity!Abs.For Heaven's sake! Faulkland, don't expose
yourself so.—Suppose she has danced, what
then?—does not the ceremony of society often
oblige—Faulk.Well, well, I'll contain myself—perhaps,
as you say—for form sake.—What, Mr. Acres,
you were praising Miss Melville's manner of dancing
a minuet—hey?Acres.O I dare insure her for that—but what
I was going to speak of was her country dancing:—
Odds swimmings! she has such an air with her!—Faulk.Now disappointment on her!—defend
this, Absolute, why don't you defend this?—
Country-dances! jiggs, and reels! am I to blame
now? A Minuet I could have forgiven—I should
not have minded that—I say I should not have regarded
a Minuet—but Country-dances! Z—ds!
had she made one in a Cotillon—I believe I could
have forgiven even that—but to be monkey-led
for a night!—to run the gauntlet thro' a string
of amorous palming puppies!—to shew paces
like a managed filly!—O Jack, there never can be
but one man in the world, whom a truly modest
and delicate woman ought to pair with in a Country-dance;
and even then, the rest of the couples
should be her great uncles and aunts!Abs.Aye, to be sure!—grand-fathers and grand-mothers!Faulk.If there be but one vicious mind in the
Set, 'twill spread like a contagion—the action of
their pulse bears to the lascivious movement of
the jigg—their quivering, warm-breath'd sighs
impregnate the very air—the atmosphere becomes
electrical to love, and each amorous
spark darts thro' every link of the chain!—I must
leave you—I own I am somewhat flurried—
and that confounded looby has perceived it.[Going.Abs.Aye, aye, you are in a hurry to throw
yourself at Julia's feet.Faulk.I'm not in a humour to be trifled with—
I shall see her only to upbraid her.[Going.Abs.Nay, but stay Faulkland, and thank Mr.
Acres for his good news.Faulk.D—n his news![Exit Faulkland.Abs.Ha! ha! ha! poor Faulkland five minutes
since—'nothing on earth could give him a
moment's uneasiness!'Acres.The gentleman wa'n't angry at my
praising his mistress, was he?Abs.A little jealous, I believe, Bob.Acres.You don't say so? Ha! ha! jealous of
me—that's a good joke.Abs.There's nothing strange in that, Bob: let
me tell you, that sprightly grace and insinuating
manner of your's will do some mischief among the
girls here.Abs.Ah! you joke—ha! ha! mischief—ha!
ha! but you know I am not my own property, my
dear Lydia, has forestalled me.—She could
never abide me in the country, because I used to
dress so badly—but odds frogs and tambours! I

shan't take matters so here—now ancient Madam
has no voice in it—I'll make my old clothes
know who's master—I shall straitway cashier the
hunting-frock—and render my leather breeches
incapable—My hair has been in training some time.Abs.Indeed!Acres.Aye—and tho'ff the side-curls are a
little restive, my hind-part takes to it very kindly.Abs.O, you'll polish, I doubt not.Acres.Absolutely I propose so—then if I can
find out this Ensign Beverley, odds triggers and
flints! I'll make him know the difference o't.Abs.Spoke like a man—but pray, Bob, I
observe you have got an odd kind of a new method
of swearing—Acres.Ha! ha! you've taken notice of it—'tis
genteel, isn't?—I didn't invent it myself though;
but a commander in our militia—a great scholar, I
assure you—says that there is no meaning in the
common oaths, and that nothing but their antiquity
makes them respectable;—because, he says, the
ancients would never stick to an oath or two, but
would say By Jove! or by Bacchus! or by Mars! or
by Venus! or by Pallas! according to the sentiment
—so that to swear with propriety, says my little
Major, the 'oath should be an echo to the sense;'
and this we call the oath referential, or sentimental
swearing—ha! ha! ha! 'tis genteel, isn't it?Abs.Very genteel, and very new indeed—and I
dare say will supplant all other figures of imprecation.Acres.Aye, aye, the best terms will grow obsolete—D—ns
have had their day.Enter Fag.Fag.Sir, there is a gentleman below, desires to
see you—shall I shew him into the parlour?Abs.Aye—you may.Acres.Well, I must be gone—Abs.Stay; who is it, Fag?Fag.Your father, Sir.Abs.You puppy, why didn't you shew him
up directly?[Exit Fag.Acres.You have business with Sir Anthony.—
I expect a message from Mrs. Malaprop at my
lodgings—I have sent also to my dear friend Sir
Lucius O'Trigger.—Adieu, Jack, we must meet
at night—Odds bottles and glasses! you shall
give me a dozen bumpers to little Lydia.Abs.That I will with all my heart.[Exit Acres.Abs.Now for a parental lecture—I hope he has
heard nothing of the business that has brought me
here.—I wish the gout had held him fast in Devonshire,
with all my soul!Enter Sir Anthony.Abs.Sir, I am delighted to see you here; and
looking so well!—your sudden arrival at Bath
made me apprehensive for your health.Sir Anth.Very apprehensive, I dare say, Jack.
—What, you are recruiting here, hey?Abs.Yes, Sir, I am on duty.Sir Anth.Well, Jack, I am glad to see you,
tho' I did not expect it, for I was going to write
to you on a little matter of business.—Jack, I have
been considering that I grow old and infirm, and
shall probably not trouble you long.Abs.Pardon me, Sir, I never saw you look
more strong and hearty; and I pray frequently that
you may continue so.Sir Anth.I hope your prayers may be heard
with all my heart. Well then, Jack, I have been
considering that I am so strong and hearty, I may
continue to plague you a long time.—Now, Jack,
I am sensible that the income of your commission,

and what I have hitherto allowed you, is but a
small pittance for a lad of your spirit.Abs.Sir, you are very good.Sir Anth.And it is my wish, while yet I live,
to have my Boy make some figure in the world.—
I have resolved, therefore, to fix you at once in a
noble independence.Abs.Sir, your kindness overpowers me—such
generosity makes the gratitude of reason more lively
than the sensations even of filial affection.Sir Anth.I am glad you are so sensible of my
attention—and you shall be master of a large estate
in a few weeks.Abs.Let my future life, Sir, speak my gratitude:
I cannot express the sense I have of your
munificence.—Yet, Sir, I presume you would
not wish me to quit the army?Sir Anth.O, that shall be as your wife chooses.Abs.My wife, Sir!Sir Anth.Aye, aye, settle that between you—
settle that between you.Abs.A wife, Sir, did you say?Sir Anth.Aye, a wife—why; did not I mention
her before?Abs.Not a word of it, Sir.Sir Anth.Odd so!—I mustn't forget her tho'.—
Yes, Jack, the independence I was talking of is by
a marriage—the fortune is saddled with a wife—
but I suppose that makes no difference.Abs.Sir! Sir!—you amaze me!Sir Anth.Why, what the d—l's the matter
with the fool? Just now you were all gratitude
and duty.Abs.I was, Sir,—you talked to me of independence
and a fortune, but not a word of a wife.Sir Anth.Why—what difference does that make?
Odd's life, Sir! if you have the estate, you must
take it with the live stock on it, as it stands.Abs.If my happiness is to be the price, I must
beg leave to decline the purchase.—Pray, Sir,
who is the lady?Sir Anth.What's that to you, Sir?—Come, give
me your promise to love, and to marry her directly.Abs.Sure, Sir, this is not very reasonable, to
summon my affections for a lady I know nothing
of!Sir Anth.I am sure, Sir, 'tis more unreasonable
in you to object to a lady you know nothing of.Abs.Then, Sir, I must tell you plainly, that
my inclinations are fix'd on another.Sir Anth.They are, are they? well, that's lucky
—because you will have more merit in your obedience
to me.Abs.Sir, my heart is engaged to an Angel.Sir Anth.Then pray let it send an excuse.—
It is very sorry—but business prevents it's waiting
on her.Abs.But my vows are pledged to her.Sir Anth.Let her foreclose, Jack; let her foreclose;
they are not worth redeeming; besides, you
have the Angel's vows in exchange, I suppose; so
there can be no loss there.Abs.You must excuse me, Sir, if I tell you,
once for all, that in this point I cannot obey you.Sir Anth.Hark'ee Jack;—I have heard you for
some time with patience—I have been cool,—quite
cool;—but take care—you know I am compliance
itself—when I am not thwarted;—no one more
easily led—when I have my own way;—but don't
put me in a phrenzy.Abs.Sir, I must repeat it—in this I cannot obey
you.Sir Anth.Now, d—n me! if ever I call you
Jack again while I live!Abs.Nay, Sir, but hear me.Sir Anth.Sir, I won't hear a word—not a word!
not one word! so give me your promise by a nod—
and I'll tell you what, Jack—I mean, you Dog—if
you don't, by—Abs.What, Sir, promise to link myself to some
mass of ugliness! to—Sir Anth.Z—ds! sirrah! the lady shall be as
ugly as I choose: she shall have a hump on each
shoulder; she shall be as crooked as the Crescent;
her one eye shall roll like the Bull's in Coxe's musaeum—she
shall have a skin like a mummy, and
the beard of a Jew—she shall be all this, sirrah!—
yet I'll make you ogle her all day, and sit up all
night to write sonnets on her beauty.Abs.This is reason and moderation indeed!Sir Anth.None of your sneering, puppy! no
grinning, jackanapes!Abs.Indeed, Sir, I never was in a worse humour
for mirth in my life.Sir Anth.'Tis false, Sir! I know you are laughing
in your sleeve: I know you'll grin when I am
gone, sirrah!Abs.Sir, I hope I know my duty better.Sir Anth.None of your passion, Sir! none of
your violence! if you please.—It won't do with
me, I promise you.Abs.Indeed, Sir, I never was cooler in my life.Sir Anth.'Tis a confounded lie!—I know you
are in a passion in your heart; I know you are, you
hypocritical young dog! but it won't do.Abs.Nay, Sir, upon my word.Sir Anth.So you will fly out! can't you be cool,
like me? What the devil good can Passion do!—
Passion is of no service, you impudent, insolent, overbearing
Reprobate!—There you sneer again!—
don't provoke me!—but you rely upon the mildness
of my temper—you do, you Dog! you play
upon the weakness of my disposition! Yet take

care—the patience of a saint may be overcome at
last!—but mark! I give you six hours and a half
to consider of this: if you then agree, without
any condition, to do every thing on earth that I
choose, why—confound you! I may in time forgive
you—If not, z—ds! don't enter the same
hemisphere with me! don't dare to breath the
same air, or use the same light with me; but get
an atmosphere and sun of your own! I'll strip
you of your commission; I'll lodge a five-and-threepence
in the hands of trustees, and you shall live
on the interest.—I'll disown you, I'll disinherit you,
I'll unget you! and—d—n me, if ever I call you
Jack again![Exit Sir Anthony.Absolute, solus.Abs.Mild, gentle, considerate father—I kiss your
hands.—What a tender method of giving his opinion
in these matters Sir Anthony has! I dare not
trust him with the truth.—I wonder what old,
wealthy Hag it is that he wants to bestow on me!
—yet he married himself for love! and was in his
youth a bold Intriguer, and a gay Companion!Enter Fag.Fag.Assuredly, Sir, our Father is wrath to a
degree; he comes down stairs eight or ten steps
at a time—muttering, growling, and thumping
the bannisters all the way: I, and the Cook's dog,
stand bowing at the door—rap! he gives me a
stroke on the head with his cane; bids me carry
that to my master, then kicking the poor Turnspit
into the area, d—ns us all, for a puppy triumvirate!—Upon
my credit, Sir, were I in
your place, and found my father such very bad
company, I should certainly drop his acquaintance.Abs.Cease your impertinence, Sir, at present.
—Did you come in for nothing more?—Stand
out of the way![Pushes him aside, and Exit.Fag, solus.Fag.Soh! Sir Anthony trims my Master; He is
afraid to reply to his Father—then vents his spleen
on poor Fag!—When one is vexed by one person,
to revenge one's self on another, who happens
to come in the way—is the vilest injustice! Ah! it
shews the worst temper—the basest—Enter Errand-Boy.Boy.Mr. Fag! Mr. Fag! your Master calls you.Fag.Well, you little, dirty puppy, you need not
baul so!—The meanest disposition! the—Boy.Quick, quick, Mr. Fag.Fag.Quick, quick, you impudent Jackanapes!
am I to be commanded by you too? you little,
impertinent, insolent, kitchen-bred—[Exit, kicking and beating him.SCENE II.The North Parade.Enter Lucy.Lucy.So—I shall have another Rival to add to my
mistress's list—Captain Absolute.—However, I
shall not enter his name till my purse has received
notice in form. Poor Acres is dismissed!—Well, I
have done him a last friendly office, in letting him
know that Beverley was here before him.—Sir
Lucius is generally more punctual, when he expects
to hear from his dear Dalia, as he calls her:
—I wonder he's not here!—I have a little scruple
of conscience from this deceit; tho' I should not
be paid so well, if my hero knew that Delia was
near fifty, and her own mistress.—I could not have
thought he would have been so nice, when there's
a golden egg in the case, as to care whether he has
it from a pullet or an old hen!Enter Sir Lucius O'Trigger.Sir Luc.Hah! my little embassadress—upon my
conscience I have been looking for you; I have
been on the South Parade this half-hour.Lucy.(Speaking simply) O gemini! and I have
been waiting for your worship here on the North.Sir Luc.Faith!—may be, that was the reason
we did not meet; and it is very comical too, how
you could go out and I not see you—for I was only
taking a nap at the Parade-Coffee-house, and I
chose the window on purpose that I might not
miss you.Lucy.My stars! Now I'd wager a six-pence I
went by while you were asleep.Sir Luc.Sure enough it must have been so—
and I never dreamt it was so late, till I waked.
Well, but my little girl, have you got nothing for
me?Lucy.Yes, but I have:—I've got a letter for
you in my pocket.Sir Luc.O faith! I guessed you weren't come
empty-handed—well—let me see what the dear
creature says.Lucy.There, Sir Lucius. (Gives him a letter.)Sir Luc.(Reads) Sir—there is often a sudden incentive
impulse in love, that has a greater induction
than years of domestic combination: such was the
commotion I felt at the first superfluous view of Sir
Lucius O'Trigger.Very pretty, upon my word. 
As my motive is interested, you may be assured my
love shall never be miscellaneous.Very well. Female
punctuation forbids me to say more; yet let me
add, that it will give me joy infallible to find Sir
Lucius worthy the last criterion of my affections.—Yours, while meretricious.—DELIA.Upon my conscience! Lucy, your lady is a great
mistress of language.—Faith, she's quite the queen

of the dictionary!—for the devil a word dare refuse
coming at her call—tho' one would think it
was quite out of hearing.Lucy.Aye, Sir, a lady of her experience.Sir Luc.Experience! what, at seventeen?Lucy.O true, Sir—but then she reads so—
my stars! how she will read off-hand!Sir Luc.Faith, she must be very deep read to
write this way—tho' she is rather an arbitrary
writer too—for here are a great many poor words
pressed into the service of this note, that would get
their habeas corpus from any court in Christendom.—However,
when affection guides the pen,
Lucy, he must be a brute who finds fault with the
style.Lucy.Ah! Sir Lucius, if you were to hear how
she talks of you!Sir Luc.O tell her, I'll make her the best husband
in the world, and Lady O'Trigger into the
bargain!—But we must get the old gentlewoman's
consent—and do every thing fairly.Lucy.Nay, Sir Lucius, I thought you wa'n't
rich enough to be so nice!Sir Luc.Upon my word, young woman, you
have hit it:—I am so poor that I can't afford to do a
dirty action.—If I did not want money I'd steal your
mistress and her fortune with a great deal of pleasure.—However,
my pretty girl, (gives her money)
here's a little something to buy you a ribband;
and meet me in the evening, and I'll give you an
answer to this. So, hussy, take a kiss before-hand,
to put you in mind. (Kisses her.)Lucy.O lud! Sir Lucius—I never seed such a
gemman! My lady won't like you if you're so
impudent.Sir Luc.Faith she will, Lucy—that same—
pho! what's the name of it?—Modesty!—is a
quality in a lover more praised by the women than
liked; so, if your mistress asks you whether Sir Lucius
ever gave you a kiss, tell her fifty—my dear.Lucy.What, would you have me tell her a lie?Sir Luc.Ah then, you baggage! I'll make it a
truth presently.Lucy.For shame now; here is some one coming.Sir Luc.O faith, I'll quiet your conscience![Sees Fag.—Exit, humming a Tune.Enter Fag.Fag.So, so, Ma'am. I humbly beg pardon.Lucy.O lud!—now, Mr. Fag—you flurry one so.Fag.Come, come, Lucy, here's no one bye—
so a little less simplicity, with a grain or two more
sincerity, if you please.—You play false with
us, Madam.—I saw you give the Baronet a letter.—My
Master shall know this—and if he don't
call him out—I will.Lucy.Ha! ha! ha! you gentlemen's gentlemen
are so hasty.—That letter was from Mrs.
Malaprop, simpleton.—She is taken with Sir
Lucius's address.Fag.What tastes some people have!—Why I
suppose I have walked by her window an hundred
times.—But what says our young lady? Any
message to my master?Lucy.Sad news! Mr. Fag.—A worse Rival than
Acres!—Sir Anthony Absolute has proposed his son.Fag.What, Captain Absolute?Lucy.Even so.—I overheard it all.Fag.Ha! ha! ha!—very good, faith.—Goodbye,
Lucy, I must away with this news.Lucy.Well—you may laugh—but it is true, I
assure you.(Going.)But—Mr. Fag—tell your master not to be cast
down by this.Fag.O he'll be so disconsolate!Luc.And charge him not to think of quarrelling
with young Absolute.Fag.Never fear!—never fear!Lucy.Be sure—bid him keep up his spirits.Fag.We will—we will.[Exeunt severally.END OF THE SECOND ACT.ACT III.SCENE I.The North Parade.Enter Absolute.'TIS just as Fag told me, indeed.—Whimsical
enough, faith! My Father wants to
force me to marry the very girl I am plotting to
run away with!—He must not know of my
connection with her yet a-while.—He has too
summary a method of proceeding in these matters
—and Lydia shall not yet lose her hopes of an
elopement.—However, I'll read my recantation
instantly.—My conversion is something sudden,
indeed—but I can assure him it is very sincere.—
So, so—here he comes.—He looks plaguy gruff.[Steps aside.Enter Sir Anthony.No—I'll die sooner than forgive him.—Die, did
I say? I'll live these fifty years to plague him.—
At our last meeting, his impudence had almost put
me out of temper.—An obstinate, passionate, selfwilled
boy!—Who can he take after? This is
my return for getting him before all his brothers and
sisters!—for putting him, at twelve years old, into a
marching regiment, and allowing him fifty pounds
a-year, beside his pay ever since!—But I have
done with him;—he's any body's son for me.—

I never will see him more,—never—never—never
—never.Abs.Now for a penitential face.Sir Anth.Fellow, get out of my way.Abs.Sir, you see a penitent before you.Sir Anth.I see an impudent scoundrel before
me.Abs.A sincere penitent.—I am come, Sir, to
acknowledge my error, and to submit entirely to
your will.Sir Anth.What's that?Abs.I have been revolving, and reflecting, and
considering on your past goodness, and kindness,
and condescension to me.Sir Anth.Well, Sir?Abs.I have been likewise weighing and balancing
what you were pleased to mention concerning
duty, and obedience, and authority.Sir Anth.Well, Puppy?Abs.Why then, Sir, the result of my reflections
is—a resolution to sacrifice every inclination of my
own to your satisfaction.Sir Anth.Why now, you talk sense—absolute
sense—I never heard any thing more sensible in my
life.—Confound you; you shall be Jack again.Abs.I am happy in the appellation.Sir Anth.Why, then, Jack, my dear Jack, I
will now inform you—who the lady really is.—
Nothing but your passion and violence, you silly
fellow, prevented my telling you at first. Prepare,
Jack, for wonder and rapture—prepare.—What
think you of Miss Lydia Languish?Abs.Languish! What, the Languishes of Worcestershire?Sir Anth.Worcestershire! No. Did you never
meet Mrs. Malaprop and her Niece, Miss Languish,
who came into our country just before you were
last ordered to your regiment?Abs.Malaprop! Languish! I don't remember
ever to have heard the names before. Yet, stay—
I think I do recollect something.—Languish!
Languish! She squints, don't she?—A little,
red-haired girl?Sir Anth.Squints?—A red-haired girl!—
Z—ds, no.Abs.Then I must have forgot; it can't be the
same person.Sir Anth.Jack! Jack! what think you of blooming,
love-breathing seventeen?Abs.As to that, Sir, I am quite indifferent.—
If I can please you in the matter, 'tis all I desire.Sir Anth.Nay, but Jack, such eyes! such eyes!
so innocently wild! so bashfully irresolute! Not a
glance but speaks and kindles some thought of
love! Then, Jack, her cheeks! her cheeks, Jack!
so deeply blushing at the insinuations of her telltale
eyes! Then, Jack, her lips!—O Jack, lips
smiling at their own discretion; and if not smiling,
more sweetly pouting; more lovely in sullenness!Abs.That's she indeed.—Well done, old gentleman!Sir Anth.Then, Jack, her neck.—O Jack!
Jack!Abs.And which is to be mine, Sir, the Niece
or the Aunt?Sir Anth.Why, you unfeeling, insensible Puppy,
I despise you. When I was of your age, such a
description would have made me fly like a rocket!
The Aunt, indeed!—Odds life! when I ran away
with your mother, I would not have touched any
thing old or ugly to gain an empire.Abs.Not to please your father, Sir?Sir Anth.To please my father!—Z—ds!
not to please—O my father!—Oddso!—
yes—yes! if my father indeed had desired—

that's quite another matter.—Tho' he wa'n't the
indulgent father that I am, Jack.Abs.I dare say not, Sir.Sir Anth.But, Jack, you are not sorry to find
your mistress is so beautiful.Sir Anth.Sir, I repeat it; if I please you in this
affair, 'tis all I desire. Not that I think a woman
the worse for being handsome; but, Sir, if you
please to recollect, you before hinted something
about a hump or two, one eye, and a few more
graces of that kind—now, without being very nice,
I own I should rather chuse a wife of mine to have
the usual number of limbs, and a limited quantity
of back: and tho' one eye may be very agreeable,
yet as the prejudice has always run in favour of
two, I would not wish to affect a singularity in
that article.Sir Anth.What a phlegmatic sot it is! Why,
sirrah, you're an anchorite!—a vile insensible
stock.—You a soldier!—you're a walking block,
fit only to dust the company's regiment on!—
Odds life! I've a great mind to marry the girl
myself!Abs.I am entirely at your disposal, Sir; if you
should think of addressing Miss Anguish yourself,
I suppose you would have me marry the Aunt; or
if you should change you're mind, and take the
old lady—'tis the same to me—I'll marry the
Niece.Sir Anth.Upon my word, Jack, thou'rt either
a very great hypocritie, or—but, come, I
know your indifference on such a subject must be
all a lie—I'm sure it must—come, now—d—n
your demure face!—come, confess, Jack—you
have been lying—ha'n't you? You have been lying,
hey? I'll never forgive you, if you ha'n't:—
so now, own, my dear Jack, you have been playing

the hypocrite, hey!—I'll never forgive you, if you
ha'n't been lying and playing the hypocrite.Abs.I'm sorry, Sir, that the respect and duty
which I bear to you should be so mistaken.Sir Anth.Hang your respect and duty! But,
come along with me, I'll write a note to Mrs.
Malaprop, and you shall visit the lady directly.Abs.Where does she lodge, Sir?Sir Anth.What a dull question!—only on the
Grove here.Abs.O! then I can call on her in my way to
the coffee-house.Sir Anth.In your way to the coffee-house!
You'll set your heart down in your way to the
coffee-house, hey? Ah! you leaden-nerv'd, wooden-hearted
dolt! But come along, you shall see
her directly; her eyes shall be the Promethian
torch to you—come along, I'll never forgive you,
if you don't come back, stark made with rapture
and impatience—if you don't, egad, I'll marry the
girl myself![Exeunt.SCENE II.Julia's Dressing-room.Faulkland, solus.Faulk.They told me Julia would return directly;
wonder she is not yet come!—How mean does
this captious, unsatisfied temper of mine appear to
my cooler judgment! Yet I know not that I indulge
it in any other point:—but on this one subject,
and to this one object, whom I think I love
beyond my life, I am ever ungenerously fretful, and
madly capricious!—I am conscious of it—yet I
cannot correct myself! What tender, honest joy
sparkled in her eyes when we met!—How delicate

was the warmth of her expressions!—I was
ashamed to appear less happy—though I had come
resolved to wear a face of coolness and upbraiding.
Sir Anthony's presence prevented my proposed
expostulations:—yet I must be satisfied that she
has not been so very happy in my absence.—She is
coming!—Yes!—I know the nimbleness of her
tread, when she thinks her impatient Faulkland
counts the moments of her stay.Enter Julia.Jul.I had not hop'd to see you again so soon.Faulk.Could I, Julia, be contented with my
first welcome—restrained as we were by the presence
of a third person?Jul.O Faulkland, when your kindness can
make me thus happy, let me not think that I discovered
more coolness in your first salutation than
my long-hoarded joy could have presaged.Faulk.'Twas but your fancy, Julia.—I was rejoiced
to see you—to see you in such health—Sure
I had no cause for coldness?Jul.Nay then, I see you have taken something
ill.—You must not conceal from me what it is.Faulk.Well then—shall I own to you—but
you will despise me, Julia—nay, I despise myself
for it.—Yet I will own, that my joy at hearing
of your health and arrival here, by your neighbour
Acres, was something damped, by his dwelling
much on the high spirits you had enjoyed in
Devonshire—on your mirth—your singing—dancing,
and I know not what!—For such is my
temper, Julia, that I should regard every mirthful
moment in your absence as a treason to constancy:
—The mutual tear that steals down the cheek of
parting lovers is a compact, that no smile shall live
there till they meet again.Jul.Must I never cease to tax my Faulkland
with this teasing minute caprice?—Can the idle
reports of a silly boor weigh in your breast against
my tried affection?Faulk.They have no weight with me, Julia:
no, no—I am happy if you have been so—yet
only say, that you did not sing with mirth—say
that you thought of Faulkland in the dance.Jul.I never can be happy, in your absence.—
If I wear a countenance of content, it is to shew
that my mind holds no doubt of my Faulkland's
truth.—If I seem'd sad—it were to make malice
triumph; and say, that I had fixed my heart on
one, who left me to lament his roving, and my
own credulity.—Believe me, Faulkland, I mean
not to upbraid you, when I say, that I have often
dressed sorrow in smiles, lest my friends should
guess whose unkindness had caused my tears.Faulk.You were ever all goodness to me.—O,
I am a brute, when I but admit a doubt of your
true constancy!Jul.If ever, without such cause from you, as I
will not suppose possible, you find my affections
veering but a point, may I become a proverbial
scoff for levity, and base ingratitude.Faulk.Ah! Julia, that last word is grating to
me. I would I had no title to your gratitude!
Search your heart, Julia; perhaps what you have
mistaken for Love, is but the warm effusion of a
too thankful heart!Jul.For what quality must I love you?Faulk.For no quality! To regard me for any
quality of mind or understanding, were only to
esteem me. And for person—I have often wish'd
myself deformed, to be convinced that I owed no
obligation there for any part of your affection.Jul.Where Nature has bestowed a shew of nice
attention in the features of a man, he should laugh

at it, as misplaced. I have seen men, who in this
vain article perhaps might rank above you; but
my heart has never asked my eyes if it were so or
not.Faulk.Now this is not well from you, Julia—I
despise person in a man—Yet if you lov'd me as
I wish, though I were an Aethiop, you'd think
none so fair.Jul.I see you are determined to be unkind.—
The contract which my poor father bound us in
gives you more than a lover's privilege.Faulk.Again, Julia, you raise ideas that feed
and justify my doubts.—I would not have been
more free—no—I am proud of my restraint.—
Yet—yet—perhaps your high respect alone for
this solemn compact has fettered your inclinations,
which else had made worthier choice.—How shall
I be sure, had you remained unbound in thought
and promise, that I should still have been the object
of your persevering love?Jul.Then try me now.—Let us be free as
strangers as to what is past:—my heart will not
feel more liberty!Faulk.There now! so hasty, Julia! so anxious
to be free!—If your love for me were fixed and
ardent, you would not loose your hold, even tho'
I wish'd it!Jul.O, you torture me to the heart!—I cannot
bear it.Faulk.I do not mean to distress you.—If I lov'd
you less, I should never give you an uneasy moment.—But
hear me.—All my fretful doubts arise
from this—Women are not used to weigh, and
separate the motives of their affections:—the cold
dictates of prudence, gratitude, or filial duty, may
sometimes be mistaken for the pleadings of the
heart.—I would not boast—yet let me say, that
I have neither age, person, or character, to found

dislike on;—my fortune such as few ladies could
be charged with indiscretion in the match.—O Julia!
when Love receives such countenance from
Prudence, nice minds will be suspicious of its
birth.Jul.I know not whither your insinuations would
tend:—as they seem pressing to insult me—I will
spare you the regret of having done so.—I have
given you no cause for this![Exit in Tears.Faulk.In Tears! stay, Julia: stay but for a
moment.—The door is fastened!—Julia!—
my soul—but for one moment:—I hear her sobbing!—'Sdeath!
what a brute am I to use her thus!
Yet stay.—Aye—she is coming now:—how little
resolution there is in woman!—how a few soft
words can turn them!—No, faith!—she is
not coming either.—Why, Julia—my love—
say but that you forgive me—come but to tell me
that—now, this is being too resentful:—stay! she
is coming too—I thought she would—no steadiness
in any thing! her going away must have been a
mere trick then—she sha'n't see that I was hurt by
it.—I'll affect indifference—(hums a tune: then
listens)—No—Z—ds! she's not coming!—
nor don't intend it, I suppose.—This is not steadiness,
but obstinacy! Yet I deserve it.—What, after
so long an absence, to quarrel with her tenderness!
—'twas barbarous and unmanly!—I should be
ashamed to see her now.—I'll wait till her just resentment
is abated—and when I distress her so
again, may I lose her for ever! and be linked instead
to some antique virago, whose knawing passions,
and long-hoarded spleen, shall make me curse
my folly half the day, and all the night![Exit.SCENE III.Mrs. Malaprop's Lodgings.Mrs. Malaprop, and Captain Absolute.Mrs. Mal.Your being Sir Anthony's son,
Captain, would itself be a sufficient accommodation;—but
from the ingenuity of your appearance,
I am convinced you deserve the character
here given of you.Abs.Permit me to say, Madam, that as I never
yet have had the pleasure of seeing Miss Languish,
my principal inducement in this affair at
present, is the honour of being allied to Mrs. Malaprop;
of whose intellectual accomplishments,
elegant manners, and unaffected learning, no
tongue is silent.Mrs. Mal.Sir, you do me infinite honour!—
I beg, Captain, you'll be seated.—(Sit)—Ah! few
gentlemen, now a days, know how to value the
ineffectual qualities in a woman! few think how a
little knowledge become a gentlewoman! Men
have no sense now but for the worthless flower,
beauty!Abs.It is but too true indeed, Ma'am;—yet I
fear our ladies should share the blame—they think
our admiration of beauty so great, that knowledge
in them would be superfluous. Thus, like gardentrees,
they seldom shew fruits, till time has robb'd
them of the more specious blossom.—Few, like
Mrs. Malaprop and the Orange-tree, are rich in
both at once!Mrs. Mal.Sir—you overpower me with goodbreeding.—He
is the very Pine-apple of politeness!
You are not ignorant, Captain, that this giddy
girl has somehow contrived to fix her affections
on a beggarly, strolling, eve's-dropping Ensign,

whom none of us have seen, and nobody knows
any thing of.Abs.O, I have heard the silly affair before.—
I'm not at all prejudiced against her on that account.Mrs. Mal.You are very good, and very considerate,
Captain.—I am sure I have done every
thing in my power since I exploded the affair!
long ago I laid my positive conjunction on her
never to think on the fellow again;—I have since
laid Sir Anthony's preposition before her;—but
I'm sorry to say she seems resolved to decline every
particle that I enjoin her.Abs.It must be very distressing indeed, Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.It gives me the hydrostatics to such
a degree!—I thought she had persisted from corresponding
with him; but behold this very day,
I have interceded another letter from the fellow!
I believe I have it in my pocket.Abs.O the devil! my last note.[Aside.Mrs. Mal.Aye, here it is.Abs.Aye, my note indeed! O the little traitress
Lucy.[Aside.Mrs. Mal.There, perhaps you may know the
writing.[Gives him the letter.Abs.I think I have seen the hand before—yes,
I certainly must have seen this hand before:—Mrs. Mal.Nay, but read it, Captain.Abs.(Reads) My soul's idol, my ador'd Lydia!
—Very tender indeed!Mrs. Mal.Tender! aye, and prophane too, o'
my conscience!Abs.I am excessively alarmed at the intelligence you
send me, the more so as my new rival—Mrs. Mal.That's you, Sir.has universally the character of being an accomplished
gentleman, and a man of honour.—Well, that's
handsome enough.Mrs. Mal.O, the fellow had some design in
writing so—Abs.That he had, I'll answer for him, Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.But go on, Sir—you'll see presently.Abs.As for the old weather-beaten she-dragon who
guards you,—Who can he mean by that?Mrs. Mal.Me, Sir—me—he means me there—
what do you think now?—but go on a little further.Abs.Impudent scoundrel!—it shall go hard but
I will elude her vigilance, as I am told that the same
ridiculous vanity, which makes her dress up her
coarse features, and deck her dull chat with hard
words which she don't understand—Mrs. Mal.There, Sir! an attack upon my language!
what do you think of that?—an aspersion
upon my parts of speech! was ever such a brute!
save if I reprehend any thing in this world, it is the
use of my oracular tongue, and a nice derangement
of epitaphs!Abs.He deserves to be hang'd and quartered!
let me see—same ridiculous vanity—Mrs. Mal.You need not read it again, Sir.Abs.I beg pardon, Ma'amdoes also lay her
open to the grossest deceptions from flattery and pretended
admiration—an impudent coxcomb!so
that I have a scheme to see you shortly with the old
Harridan's consent, and even to make her a go between
in our interviews.—Was ever such assurance.Mrs. Mal.Did you ever hear any thing like it?
—he'll elude my vigilance, will he?—yes, yes!
ha! ha! he's very likely to enter these floors!—
we'll try who can plot best!Abs.Ha! ha! had a conceited puppy, ha! ha!
ha!—Well, but Mrs. Malaprop, as the girl
seems so infatuated by this fellow, suppose you
were to wink at her corresponding with him for

a little time—let her even plot an elopement with
him—then do you connive at her escape—while I,
just in the nick, will have the fellow laid by the
heels, and fairly contrive to carry her off in his
stead.Mrs. Mal.I am delighted with the scheme, never
was any thing better perpetrated!Abs.But, pray, could not I see the lady for a few
minutes now?—I should like to try her temper a
little.Mrs. Mal.Why, I don't know—I doubt she
is not prepared for a first visit of this kind.—
There is a decorum in these matters.Abs.O Lord! she won't mind me—only tell her
Beverley—Mrs. Mal.Sir!—Abs.Gently, good tongue.[Aside.Mrs. Mal.What did you say of Beverley?Abs.O, I was going to propose that you
should tell her, by way of jest, that it was Beverley
who was below—she'd come down fast enough
then—ha! ha! ha!Mrs. Mal.'Twould be a trick she well-deserves
—besides you know the fellow tells her he'll get my
consent to see her—ha! ha!—Let him if he can, I
say again.—Lydia, come down here![Calling.—He'll make me a go-between in their interviews!
—ha! ha! ha! Come down, I say, Lydia!—I
don't wonder at your laughing, ha! ha! ha! his
impudence is truly ridiculous.Abs.'Tis very ridiculous, upon my soul,
Ma'am, ha! ha! ha!Mrs. Mal.The little hussy won't hear.—Well,
I'll go and tell her at once who it is—she shall
know that Capt. Absolute is come to wait on her.
—And I'll make her behave as becomes a young
woman.Abs.As you please, Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.For the present, Captain, your servant—Ah!
you've not done laughing yet, I see—
elude my vigilance! yes, yes, ha! ha! ha![Exit.Abs.Ha! ha! ha! one would think now that
I might throw off all disguise at once, and seize
my prize with security—but such is Lydia's caprice,
that to undeceive were probably to lose her.
—I'll see whether she knows me.[Walks aside, and seems engaged in looking at the
pictures.Enter Lydia.Lyd.What a scene am I now to go thro'! surely
nothing can be more dreadful than to be obliged
to listen to the loathsome addresses of a stranger to
one's heart.—I have heard of girls persecuted as I
am, who have appealed in behalf of their favoured
lover to the generosity of his rival: suppose I
were to try it—there stands the hated rival—an
officer too!—but O how unlike my Beverley!—
I wonder he don't begin—truly he seems a very
negligent wooer!—quite at his ease, upon my
word! I'll speak first—Mr. Absolute.Abs.Madam.[Turns round.Lyd.O Heav'ns! Beverley!Abs.Hush!—hush, my life!—softly! be not
surprised!Lyd.I am so astonished! and so terrified! and
so overjoy'd!—for Heav'n's sake! how came you
here?Abs.Briefly—I have deceived your Aunt—I
was informed that my new rival was to visit here
this evening, and contriving to have him kept
away, have passed myself on her for Capt. Absolute.Lyd.O, charming!—And she really takes you
for young Absolute?Abs.O, she's convinced of it.Lyd.Ha! ha! ha! I can't forbear laughing to
think how her sagacity is over-reached!Abs.But we trifle with our precious moments—
such another opportunity may not occur—then let
me now conjure my kind, my condescending angel,
to fix the time when I may rescue her from undeserved
persecution, and with a licensed warmth
plead for my reward.Lyd.Will you then, Beverley, consent to forfeit
that portion of my paltry wealth?—that burthen
on the wings of love?Abs.O come to me—rich only thus—in loveliness—Bring
no portion to me but thy love—'twill
be generous in you, Lydia—for well you know, it
is the only dower your poor Beverley can repay.Lyd.How persuasive are his words!—how
charming will poverty be with him!Abs.Ah! my soul, what a life will we then
live? Love shall be our idol and support! we will
worship him with a monastic strictness; abjuring
all worldly toys, to center every thought and
action there.—Proud of calamity, we will enjoy the
wreck of wealth; while the surrounding gloom of
adversity shall make the flame of our pure love
show doubly bright.—By Heav'ns! I would fling
all goods of fortune from me with a prodigal
hand to enjoy the scene where I might clasp my
Lydia to my bosom, and say, the world affords no
smile to me—but here—[Embracing her.If she holds out now the devil is in it![Aside.Lyd.Now could I fly with him to the Antipodes!
but my persecution is not yet come to a crisis.Enter Mrs. Malaprop, listening.Mrs. Mal.I'm impatient to know how the little
huzzy deports herself.[Aside.Abs.So pensive, Lydia!—is then your warmth
abated?Mrs. Mal.Warmth abated!—so!—she has been
in a passion, I suppose.Lyd.No—nor ever can while I have life.Mrs. Mal.An ill-temper'd little devil!—She'll
be in a passion all her life—will she?Lyd.Think not the idle threats of my ridiculous
aunt can ever have any weight with me.Mrs. Mal.Very dutiful, upon my word!Lyd.Let her choice be Capt. Absolute, but Beverley
is mine.Mrs. Mal.I am astonished at her assurance!—
to his face—this to his face!Abs.Thus then let me enforce my suit.[Kneeling.Mrs. Mal.Aye—poor young man!—down on
his knees entreating for pity!—I can contain no
longer.—Why, huzzy! huzzy!—I have overheard
you.Abs.O confound her vigilance![Aside.Mrs. Mal.Capt. Absolute—I know not how
to apologize for her shocking rudeness.Abs.So—all's safe, I find.[Aside.I have hopes, Madam, that time will bring the
young lady—Mrs. Mal.O, there's nothing to be hoped for
from her! she's as headstrong as an allegory on
the banks of Nile.Lyd.Nay, Madam, what do you charge me
with now?Mrs. Mal.Why, thou unblushing rebel—didn't
you tell this gentleman to his face that you loved
another better?—didn't you say you never would
be his?Lyd.No, Madam—I did not.Mrs. Mal.Good Heav'ns! what assurance!—
Lydia, Lydia, you ought to know that lying don't

become a young woman!—Didn't you boast that
Beverley—that stroller Beverley, possessed your
heart?—Tell me that, I say.Lyd.'Tis true, Ma'am, and none but Beverley—Mrs. Mal.Hold;—hold Assurance!—you shall
not be so rude.Abs.Nay, pray Mrs. Malaprop, don't stop the
young lady's speech:—she's very welcome to talk
thus—it does not hurt me in the least, I assure
you.Mrs. Mal.You are too good, Captain—too amiably
patient—but come with me, Miss—let us see
you again soon, Captain—remember what we have
fixed.Abs.I shall, Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.Come, take a graceful leave of the
gentleman.Lyd.May every blessing wait on my Beverley,
my lov'd Bev—Mrs. Mal.Huzzy! I'll choak the word in your
throat!—come along—come along.[Exeunt severally.[Beverley kissing his hand to Lydia—Mrs.
Malaprop stopping her from speaking.SCENE V. Acres's lodgings.Acres and David.Acres as just dress'd.Acres.Indeed, David—do you think I become
it so?Dav.You are quite another creature, believe
me Master, by the Mass! an' we've any luck we
shall see the Devon monkeyrony in all the printshops
in Bath!Acres.Dress does make a difference, David.Dav.'Tis all in all, I think—difference! why,
an' you were to go now to Clod-Hall, I am certain
the old lady wouldn't know you: Master Butler
wouldn't believe his own eyes, and Mrs. Pickle
would cry, "Lard presarve me!" our dairy-maid
would come giggling to the door, and I warrant
Dolly Tester, your Honour's favourite, would
blush like my waistcoat.—Oons! I'll hold a gallon,
there an't a dog in the house but would bark,
and I question whether Phillis would wag a hair of
her tail!Acres.Aye, David, there's nothing like polishing.Dav.So I says of your Honour's boots; but
the boy never heeds me!Acres.But, David, has Mr. De-la-Grace been
here? I must rub up my balancing, and chasing,
and boring.Dav.I'll call again, Sir.Acres.Do—and see if there are any letters for
me at the post-office.Dav.I will.—By the Mass, I can't help
looking at your head!—if I hadn't been by at the
cooking, I wish I may die if I should have known
the dish again myself![Exit.[Acres comes forward, practising a dancing step.Acres.Sink, slide—coupee—Confound the first
inventors of cotillons! say I—they are as bad as algebra
to us country gentlemen—I can walk a Minuet
easy enough when I'm forced!—and I have
been accounted a good stick in a Country-dance.
—Odd's jigs and tabors!—I never valued your crossover
two couple—figure in—right and left—and
I'd foot it with e'er a captain in the county!—but
these outlandish heathen Allemandes and Cotillons
are quite beyond me!—I shall never prosper at
'em, that's sure—mine are true-born English legs—
they don't understand their curst French lingo!

—their Pas this, and Pas that, and Pas t'other!—
d—n me, my feet don't like to be called Paws!
no, 'tis certain I have most Antigallican Toes!Enter Servant.Serv.Here is Sir Lucius O'Trigger to wait on
you, Sir.Acres.Shew him in.Enter Sir Lucius.Sir Luc.Mr. Acres, I am delighted to embrace
you.Acres.My dear Sir Lucius, I kiss your hands.Sir Luc.Pray, my friend, what has brought you
so suddenly to Bath?Acres.Faith! I have followed Cupid's Jack-a-Lantern,
and find myself in a quagmire at last.—
In short, I have been very ill-used, Sir Lucius.—
I don't choose to mention names, but look on me
as on a very ill-used gentleman.Sir Luc.Pray, what is the case?—I ask no
names.Acres.Mark me, Sir Lucius, I falls as deep as
need be in love with a young lady—her friends
take my part—I follow her to Bath—send word of
my arrival; and receive answer, that the lady is
to be otherwise disposed of.—This, Sir Lucius, I
call being ill-used.Sir Luc.Very ill, upon my conscience—Pray,
can you divine the cause of it?Acres.Why, there's the matter: she has another
lover, one Beverley, who, I am told, is now in Bath.
—Odds slanders and lies! he must be at the bottom
of it.Sir Luc.A rival in the case, is there?—and
you think he has supplanted you unfairly.Acres.Unfairly!—to be sure he has.—He never
could have done it fairly.Sir Luc.Then sure you know what is to be
done!Acres.Not I, upon my soul!Sir Luc.We wear no swords here, but you understand
me.Acres.What! fight him!Sir Luc.Aye, to be sure: what can I mean else?Acres.But he has given me no provocation.Sir Luc.Now, I think he has given you the
greatest provocation in the world.—Can a man
commit a more heinous offence against another than
to fall in love with the same woman? O, by my
soul, it is the most unpardonable breach of friendship!Acres.Breach of friendship! Aye, aye; but I
have no acquaintance with this man. I never saw
him in my life.Sir Luc.That's no argument at all—he has the
less right then to take such a liberty.Acres.'Gad that's true—I grow full of anger,
Sir Lucius!—I fire apace! Odds hilts and blades!
I find a man may have a deal of valour in him, and
not know it! But couldn't I contrive to have a
little right of my side?Sir Luc.What the d—l signifies right, when
your honour is concerned? Do you think Achilles, or
my little Alexander the Great ever inquired where
the right lay? No, by my soul, they drew their
broad-swords, and left the lazy sons of peace to
settle the justice of it.Acres.Your words are a grenadier's march to
my heart! I believe courage must be catching!—
I certainly do feel a kind of valour rising as it were
—a kind of courage, as I may say—Odds
flints, pans, and triggers! I'll challenge him directly.Sir Luc.Ah, my little friend! if we had Blunderbuss-Hall
here—I could shew you a range of ancestry,

in the O'Trigger line, that would furnish
the new room; every one of whom had killed
his man!—For though the mansion-house and
dirty acres have slipt through my fingers, I thank
God our honour, and the family-pictures, are as
fresh as ever.Acres.O Sir Lucius! I have had ancestors too!
every man of 'em colonel or captain in the militia?—Odds
balls and barrels! say no more—I'm
brac'd for it—my nerves are become catgut! my
sinews wire! and my heart Pinchbeck! The thunder
of your words has soured the milk of human
kindness in my breast!—Z—ds! as the man in
the play says, "I could do such deeds!"Sir Luc.Come, come, there must be no passion
at all in the case—these things should always be
done civilly.Acres.I must be in a passion, Sir Lucius—I
must be in a rage—Dear Sir Lucius let me be
in a rage, if you love me.—Come, here's pen
and paper.(Sits down to write)I would the ink were red!—Indite, I say, indite!—How
shall I begin? Odds bullets and
blades! I'll write a good bold hand, however.Sir Luc.Pray compose yourself.Acres.Come—now shall I begin with an oath?
Do, Sir Lucius, let me begin with a damme.Sir Luc.Pho! pho! do the thing decently and
like a Christian. Begin now,—"Sir—Acres.That's too civil by half.Sir Luc."To prevent the confusion that might
arise."Acres.Well—Sir Luc."From our both addressing the same lady."Acres.Aye—there's the reason—"same lady"—
Well—Sir Luc."I shall expect the honour of your company"—Acres.Z—ds! I'm not asking him to dinner.Sir Luc.Pray be easy.Acres.Well then, "honour of your company"Sir Luc.To settle our pretensions."Acres.Well.Sir Luc.Let me see, aye, King's Mead-fields will
do.—"In King's Mead fields."Acres.So that's done.—Well, I'll fold it up
presently; my own crest—a hand and dagger shall
be the seal.Sir Luc.You see now this little explanation will
put a stop at once to all confusion or misunderstanding
that might arise between you.Acres.Aye, we fight to prevent any misunderstanding.Sir Luc.Now, I'll leave you to fix your own
time.—take my advice, and you'll decide it this
evening if you can; then let the worst come of it,
'twill be off your mind to-morrow.Acres.Very true.Sir Luc.So I shall see nothing more of you, unless
it be by letter, till the evening.—I would
do myself the honour to carry your message; but,
to tell you a secret, I believe I shall have just such
another affair on my own hands. There is a gay
captain here, who put a jest on me lately, at the
expence of my country, and I only want to fall in
with the gentleman, to call him out.Acres.By my valour, I should like to see you
fight first! Odds life! I should like to see you kill
him, if it was only to get a little lesson.Sir Luc.I shall be very proud of instructing you.
—Well for the present—but remember now,
when you meet your antagonist, do every thing in
a mild and agreeable manner.—Let your courage
be as keen, but at the same time as polished as
your sword.[Exeunt severally.END OF THE THIRD ACT.ACT IV.SCENE I.Acres's Lodgings.Acres and David.David.THEN, by the Mass, Sir! I would do
no such thing—ne'er a Sir Lucius
O'Trigger in the kingdom should make me fight,
when I wa'n't so minded. Oons! what will the
old lady say, when she hears o't!Acres.Ah! David, if you had heard Sir Lucius!—Odds
sparks and flames! he would have
rous'd your valour.David.Not he, indeed. I hates such bloodthirsty
cormorants. Look'ee, Master, if you'd
wanted a bout at boxing, quarter-staff, or shortstaff,
I should never be the man to bid you cry off:
But for your curst sharps and snaps, I never knew
any good come of 'em.Acres.But my honour, David, my honour! I
must be very careful of my honour.David.Aye, by the Mass! and I would be very
careful of it; and I think in return my honour
couldn't do less than to be very careful of me.Acres.Odds blades! David, no gentleman will
ever risk the loss of his honour!David.I say then, it would be but civil in honour
never to risk the loss of the gentleman.—
Lookee, Master, this honour seems to me to be a marvellous

false friend; aye, truly, a very courtier-like
servant.—Put the case, I was a gentleman (which,
thank God, no one can say of me); well—my honour
makes me quarrel with another gentleman of
my acquaintance.—So—we fight. (Pleasant enough
that) Boh!—I kill him—(the more's my luck.)
Now, pray who gets the profit of it?—Why, my
honour.—But put the case that he kills me!—
by the Mass! I go to the worms, and my honour
whips over to my enemy!Acres.No, David—in that case!—Odds crowns
and laurels! your honour follows you to the
grave.David.Now, that's just the place where I could
make a shift to do without it.Acres.Z—ds, David! you're a coward!—
It doesn't become my valour to listen to you.—
What, shall I disgrace my ancestors?—Think of
that, David—think what it would be to disgrace
my ancestors!David.Under favour, the surest way of not disgracing
them, is to keep as long as you can out
of their company. Look'ee now, Master, to go to
them in such haste—with an ounce of lead in your
brains—I should think might as well be let alone.
Our ancestors are very good kind of folks; but
they are the last people I should choose to have a
visiting acquaintance with.Acres.But David, now, you don't think there
is such very, very, very great danger, hey?—
Odds life! people often fight without any mischief
done!David.By the Mass, I think 'tis ten to one
against you!—Oons! here to meet some lionheaded
fellow, I warrant, with his d—n'd doublebarrell'd
swords, and cut and thrust pistols! Lord
bless us! it makes me tremble to think o't!—
Those be such desperate bloody-minded weapons!

Well, I never could abide 'em!—from a child I
never could fancy 'em!—I suppose there a'n't so
merciless a beast in the world as your loaded pistol!Acres.Z—ds! I won't be afraid—Odds fire
and fury! you shan't make me afraid.—Here is
the challenge, and I have sent for my dear friend
Jack Absolute to carry it for me.David.Aye, I'the name of mischief, let him be
the messenger.—For my part, I wouldn't lend a
hand to it for the best horse in your stable. By
the Mass! it don't look like another letter!—It is,
as I may say, a designing and malicious-looking
letter!—and I warrant smells of gunpowder like
a soldier's pouch!—Oons! I wouldn't swear it
mayn't go off!Acres.Out, you poltroon!—you ha'n't the valour
of a grass-hopper.David.Well, I say no more—'twill be sad news,
to be sure, at Clod-Hall!—but I ha' done.—How
Phyllis will howl when she hears of it!—Aye, poor
bitch, she little thinks what shooting her Master's
going after!—And I warrant old Crop, who has
carried your honour, field and road, these ten
years, will curse the hour he was born.(Whimpering.)Acres.It won't do, David—I am determined to
fight—so get along, you Coward, while I'm in the
mind.Enter Servant.Serv.Captain Absolute, Sir.Acres.O! shew him up.[Exit Servant.David.Well, Heaven send we be all alive this
time to-morrow.Acres.What's that!—Don't provoke me, David!David.Good bye, Master.(Whimpering.)Acres.Getalong, you cowardly, dastardly, croaking
raven.[Exit David.Enter Absolute.Abs.What's the matter, Bob?Acres.A vile, sheep-hearted blockhead!—If I
hadn't the valour of St. George and the dragon to
boot—Abs.But what did you want with me, Bob?Acres.O!—There—(Gives him the challenge.)Abs."To Ensign Beverley." So—what's going
on now![Aside.Well, what's this?Acres.A challenge!Abs.Indeed!—Why, you won't fight him;
will you, Bob?Acres.'Egad but I will, Jack.—Sir Lucius
has wrought me to it. He has left me full of
rage—and I'll fight this evening, that so much
good passion mayn't be wasted.Abs.But what have I to do with this?Acres.Why, as I think you know something of
this fellow, I want you to find him out for me,
and give him this mortal defiance.Abs.Well, give it to me, and trust me he gets it.Acres.Thank you, my dear friend, my dear
Jack; but it is giving you a great deal of trouble.Abs.Not in the least—I beg you won't mention
it.—No trouble in the world, I assure you.Acres.You are very kind.—What it is to
have a friend!—You couldn't be my second—
could you, Jack?Abs.Why no, Bob—not in this affair—it would
not be quite so proper.Acres.Well then I must fix on my friend Sir
Lucius. I shall have your good wishes, however,
Jack.Abs.Whenever he meets you, believe me.Enter Servant.Serv.Sir Anthony Absolute is below, inquiring
for the Captain.Abs.I'll come instantly.—Well, my little
hero, success attend you.(Going.)Acres.Stay—stay, Jack.—If Beverley should
ask you what kind of a man your friend Acres is,
do, tell him I am a devil of a fellow—will you,
Jack?Abs.To be sure I shall.—I'll say you are a
determined dog—hey, Bob!Acres.Aye, do, do—and if that frightens him,
'egad perhaps he mayn't come. So tell him I generally
kill a man a week; will you, Jack!Abs.I will, I will; I'll say you are call'd in the
country "Fighting Bob!"Acres.Right, right—'tis all to prevent mischief;
for I don't want to take his life if I clear my honour.Abs.No!—that's very kind of you.Acres.Why, you don't wish me to kill him—do
you, Jack?Abs.No, upon my soul, I do not.—But a devil
of a fellow, hey?(Going.)Acres.True, true—but stay—stay, Jack—you
may add that you never saw me in such a rage before
—a most devouring rage!Abs.I will, I will.Acres.Remember, Jack—a determined dog!Abs.Aye, aye, "Fighting Bob!"[Exeunt severally.SCENE II.Mrs. Malaprop's Lodgings.Mrs. Malaprop and Lydia.Mrs. Mal.Why, thou perverse one!—tell me
what you can object to him?—Isn't he a handsome

man?—tell me that.—A genteel man? a
pretty figure of a man?Lyd.She little thinks whom she is praising!
(aside)—So is Beverley, Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.No caparisons, Miss, if you please!
—Caparisons don't become a young woman.—No!
Captain Absolute is indeed a fine gentleman!Lyd.Aye, the Captain Absolute you have seen.[Aside.Mrs. Mal.Then he's so well bred;—so full of
alacrity, and adulation!—and has so much to say
for himself:—in such good language too!—His
physiognomy so grammatical!—Then his presence
is so noble!—I protest, when I saw him, I thought
of what Hamlet says in the Play:—Hesperian
curls!—the front of Job himself!—an eye, like
March, to threaten at command!—a Station,
like Harry Mercury, new— Something about
kissing—on a hill—however, the similitudé struck
me directly.Lyd.How enraged she'll be presently when she
discovers her mistake![Aside.Enter Servant.Serv.Sir Anthony, and Captain Absolute are
below Ma'am.Mrs. Mal.Shew them up here.
[Exit Serv.
Now, Lydia, I insist on your behaving as becomes
a young woman.—Shew your good breeding at
least, though you have forgot your duty.Lyd.Madam, I have told you my resolution;—I
shall not only give him no encouragement, but I
won't even speak to, or look at him.[Flings herself into a chair, with her face from the door.Enter Sir Anthony and Absolute.Sir Anth.Here we are, Mrs. Malaprop; come
to mitigate the frowns of unrelenting beauty—and

difficulty enough I had to bring this fellow.—I
don't know what's the matter; but if I hadn't held
him by force, he'd have given me the slip.Mrs. Mal.You have infinite trouble, Sir Anthony,
in the affair.—I am ashamed for the cause!
Lydia, Lydia, rise I beseech you!—pay your respects![Aside to her.Sir Anth.I hope, Madam, that Miss Languish
has reflected on the worth of this gentleman, and
the regard due to her Aunt's choice, and my alliance.
—Now, Jack, speak to her![Aside to him.Abs.What the d—I shall I do!—(Aside)—You
see, Sir, she won't even look at me, whilst you are
here.—I knew she wouldn't!—I told you so—Let
me intreat you, Sir, to leave us together![Absolute seems to expostulate with his Father.Lyd.(aside.) I wonder I ha'n't heard my Aunt
exclaim yet! sure she can't have look'd at him!
—perhaps their regimentals are alike, and she is
something blind.Sir Anth.I say, Sir, I won't stir a foot yet.Mrs. Mal.I am sorry to say, Sir Anthony, that
my affluence over my Niece is very small.—Turn
round Lydia, I blush for you![Aside to her.Sir Anth.May I not flatter myself that Miss
Languish will assign what cause of dislike she can
have to my son!—Why don't you begin, Jack?—
Speak, you puppy—speak![Aside to him.Mrs. Mal.It is impossible, Sir Anthony, she
can have any.—She will not say she has.—
Answer, hussy! why don't you answer?[Aside to her.Sir Anth.Then, Madam, I trust that a childish
and hasty predilection will be no bar to Jack's
happiness.—Z—ds! sirrah! why don't you speak?[Aside to him.Lyd.(aside) I think my lover seems as little inclined

to conversation as myself.—How strangely
blind my Aunt is!Abs.Hem! hem!—Madam—hem! (Absolute
attempts to speak, then returns to Sir Anthony)—
Faith! Sir, I am so confounded!—and so—so—
confused!—I told you I should be so, Sir,—I knew
it—The-the-tremor of my passion, entirely takes
away my presence of mind.Sir Anth.But it don't take away your voice,
fool, does it?—Go up, and speak to her directly!
[Abs. makes signs to Mrs. Mal. to leave them together.]Mrs. Mal.Sir Anthony, shall we leave them together?
—Ah! you stubborn, little vixen![Aside to her.Sir Anth.Not yet, Ma'am, not yet!—what the
d—l are you at? unlock your jaws, sirrah, or—[Aside to him.[Absolute draws near Lydia.]Abs.Now Heav'n send she may be too sullen to
look round!—I must disguise my voice—(Aside)—[Speaks in a low hoarse tone.—Will not Miss Languish lend an ear to the mild
accents of true love?—Will not—Sir Anth.What the d—l ails the fellow?—
Why don't you speak out?—not stand croaking
like a frog in a quinsey!Abs.The—the—excess of my awe, and my—my—
my modesty, quite choak me!Sir Anth.Ah! your modesty again!—I'll tell
you what, Jack; if you don't speak out directly,
and glibly too, I shall be in such a rage!—Mrs.
Malaprop, I wish the lady would favour us with
something more than a side-front![Mrs. Malaprop seems to chide Lydia.Abs.So!—all will out I see![Goes up to Lydia, speaks softly.Be not surprised, my Lydia, suppress all surprise at
present.Lyd.(aside) Heav'ns! 'tis Beverley's voice!—
Sure he can't have impos'd on Sir Anthony too!—[Looks round by degrees, then starts up.Is this possible!—my Beverley!—how can this be?
—my Beverley?Abs.Ah! 'tis all over.[Aside.Sir Anth.Beverley!—the devil—Beverley!—
What can the girl mean?—This is my son, Jack
Absolute!Mrs. Mal.For shame, hussy! for shame!—
your head runs so on that fellow, that you have
him always in your eyes!—beg Captain Absolute's
pardon directly.Lyd.I see no Captain Absolute, but my lov'd
Beverley!Sir Anth.Z—ds! the girl's mad!—her brain's
turn'd by reading!Mrs. Mal.O' my conscience, I believe so!—
what do you mean by Beverley, hussy?—You saw
Captain Absolute before to-day; there he is—
your husband that shall be.Lyd.With all my soul, Ma'am—when I refuse
my Beverley—Sir Anth.O! she's as mad as Bedlam!—or has
this fellow been playing us a rogue's trick!—Come
here, sirrah! who the d—l are you?Abs.Faith, Sir, I am not quite clear myself;
but I'll endeavour to recollect.Sir Anth.Are you my son, or not?—answer for
your mother, you dog, if you won't for me.Mrs. Mal.Aye, Sir, who are you? O mercy! I
begin to suspect!—Abs.Ye Powers of Impudence befriend me!
(aside) Sir Anthony, most assuredly I am your
wife's son; and that I sincerely believe myself to
be your's also, I hope my duty has always shewn.
—Mrs. Malaprop, I am your most respectful admirer
—and shall be proud to add affectionate nephew.
—I need not tell my Lydia, that she sees her
faithful Beverley, who, knowing the singular generosity
of her temper, assum'd that name, and a
station, which has proved a test of the most disinterested
love, which he now hopes to enjoy in a
a more elevated character.Lyd.So!—there will be no elopement after all!(sullenly.Sir Anth.Upon my soul, Jack, thou art a very
impudent fellow! to do you justice, I think I never
saw a piece of more consummate assurance!Abs.O, you flatter me, Sir—you compliment—
'tis my modesty you know, Sir—my modesty that has
stood in my way.Sir Anth.Well, I am glad you are not the dull,
insensible varlet you pretended to be, however!—
I'm glad you have made a fool of your father, you
dog—I am.—So this was your penitence, your
duty, and obedience!—I thought it was d—n'd sudden!
—You never heard their names before, not you!
—What, Languishes of Worcestershire, hey?—if you
could please me in the affair, 'twas all you desired!—
Ah! you dissembling villain!—What! (pointing
to Lydia) she squints, don't she?—a little red-hair'd
girl!—hey?—Why, you hypocritical young rascal
—I wonder you a'n't asham'd to hold up your
head!Abs.'Tis with difficulty, Sir—I am confus'd—
very much confus'd, as you must perceive.Mrs. Mal.O Lud! Sir Anthony!—a new light
breaks in upon me!—hey! how! what! Captain,
did you write the letters then?—What!—I am to
thank you for the elegant compilation of 'an old
weather-beaten she-dragon'—hey?—O mercy!—was
it you that reflected on my parts of speech?Abs.Dear Sir! my modesty will be overpower'd
at last, if you don't assist me.—I shall certainly
not be able to stand it!Sir Anth.Come, come, Mrs. Malaprop, we
must forget and forgive;—odds'life! matters have
taken so clever a turn all of a sudden, that I could
find in my heart, to be so good-humour'd! and
so gallant!—hey! Mrs. Malaprop!Mrs. Mal.Well, Sir Anthony, since you desire
it, we will not anticipate the past;—so mind young
people—our retrospection will now be all to the
future.Sir Anth.Come, we must leave them together;
Mrs. Malaprop, they long to fly into each other's
arms, I warrant!—Jack—is'n't the cheek as I said,
hey?—and the eye, you dog!—and the lip—hey?
Come, Mrs. Malaprop, we'll not disturb their
tenderness—their's is the time of life for happiness!
—"Youth's the season made for joy"—(sings)
—hey!—Odds'life! I'm in such spirits,—I don't
know what I couldn't do!—Permit me, Ma'am—
(gives his hand to Mrs. Mal.) (sings) Tol-de-rol—
'gad I should like a little fooling myself—Tol-derol!
de-rol![Exit singing, and handing Mrs. Mal.(Lydia sits sullenly in her chair.)Abs.So much thought bodes me no good (aside)
—So grave, Lydia!Lyd.Sir!Abs.So!—egad! I thought as much!—that
d—n'd monosyllable has froze me! (aside)—What,
Lydia, now that we are as happy in our friends
consent, as in our mutual vows—Lyd.Friends consent, indeed! (peevishly)Abs.Come, come, we must lay aside some of
our romance—a little wealth and comfort may be
endur'd after all. And for your fortune, the lawyers
shall make such settlements as—Lyd.Lawyers! I hate lawyers!Abs.Nay then, we will not wait for their lingering
forms, but instantly procure the licence, and—Lyd.The licence!—I hate licence!Abs.O my Love! be not so unkind!—thus let
me intreat—[Kneeling.Lyd.Pshaw!—what signifies kneeling, when you
know I must have you?Abs.(rising) Nay, Madam, there shall be no
constraint upon your inclinations, I promise you.
—If I have lost your heart,—I resign the rest.—
'Gad, I must try what a little spirit will do.[Aside.Lyd.(rising) Then, Sir, let me tell you, the interest
you had there was acquired by a mean, unmanly
imposition, and deserves the punishment of
fraud.—What, you have been treating me like a
child!—humouring my romance! and laughing, I
suppose, at your success!Abs.You wrong me, Lydia, you wrong me—
only hear—Lyd.So, while I fondly imagined we were deceiving
my relations, and flatter'd myself that I
should outwit and incense them all—behold! my
hopes are to be crush'd at once, by my Aunt's consent
and approbation!—and I am myself, the only
dupe at last![Walking about in heat.Abs.Nay, but hear me—Lyd.No, Sir, you could not think that such
paltry artifices could please me, when the mask
was thrown off!—But I suppose since your tricks
have made you secure of my fortune, you are little
solicitous about my affections.—But here, Sir, here
is the picture—Beverley's picture! (taking a miniature
from her bosom) which I have worn, night
and day, in spite of threats and entreaties!—
There, Sir, (flings it to him) and be assured I
throw the original from my heart as easily!Abs.Nay, nay, Ma'am, we will not differ as to
that.—Here, (taking out a picture) here is Miss Lydia
Languish.—What a difference!—aye, there is
the heav'nly assenting smile, that first gave soul

and spirit to my hopes!—those are the lips which
seal'd a vow, as yet scarce dry in Cupid's calendar!
—and there the half resentful blush, that would
have check'd the ardour of my thanks—Well, all
that's past!—all over indeed!—There, Madam—
in beauty, that copy is not equal to you, but in my
mind it's merit over the original, in being still
the same, is such—that—I cannot find in my heart
to part with it.[Puts it up again.Lyd.(Softening) 'Tis your own doing, Sir—I, I,
I suppose you are perfectly satisfied.Abs.O, most certainly—sure now this is much
better than being in love!—ha! ha! ha!—there's
some spirit in this!—What signifies breaking some
scores of solemn promises, half an hundred vows,
under one's hand, with the marks of a dozen or two
angels to witness—all that's of no consequence you
know.—To be sure people will say, that Miss didn't
know her own mind—but never mind that:—
or perhaps they may be ill-natured enough to hint,
that the gentleman grew tired of the lady and forsook
her—but don't let that fret you.Lyd.There's no bearing his insolence.[Bursts into tears.Enter Mrs. Malaprop and Sir Anthony.Mrs. Mal.(Entering) Come, we must interrupt
your billing and cooing a while.Lyd.This is worse than your treachery and deceit,
you base ingrate![Sobbing.Sir Anth.What the devil's the matter now!—
Z—ds! Mrs. Malaprop, this is the oddest billing
and cooing I ever heard!—but what the deuce is
the meaning of it?—I'm quite astonish'd!Abs.Ask the lady, Sir.Mrs. Mal.O mercy!—I'm quite analys'd for
my part!—why, Lydia, what is the reason of
this?Lyd.Ask the gentleman, Ma'am.Sir Anth.Z—ds! I shall be in a phrenzy!—
why Jack, you scoundrel, you are not come out to
be any one else, are you?Mrs. Mal.Aye, Sir, there's no more trick, is
there?—you are not like Cerberus, three Gentlemen
at once, are you?Abs.You'll not let me speak—I say the lady
can account for this much better than I can.Lyd.Ma'am, you once commanded me never to
think of Beverley again—there is the man—I now
obey you:—for, from this moment, I renounce
him for ever.[Exit Lydia.Mrs. Mal.O mercy! and miracles! what a
turn here is—why sure, Captain, you haven't behaved
disrespectfully to my Niece.Sir Anth.Ha! ha! ha!—ha! ha! ha!—now I
see it—Ha! ha! ha!—now I see it—you have
been too lively, Jack.Abs.Nay, Sir, upon my word—Sir Anth.Come, no lying, Jack—I'm sure 'twas
so.Mrs. Mal.O Lud! Sir Anthony!—O fie,
Captain!Abs.Upon my soul, Ma'am—Sir Anth.Come, no excuses, Jack;—why, your
father, you rogue, was so before you:—the blood
of the Absolutes was always impatient.—Ha! ha!
ha! poor little Lydia!—why, you've frighten'd
her, you Dog, you have.Abs.By all that's good, Sir—Sir Anth.Z—ds! say no more, I tell you.—
Mrs. Malaprop shall make your peace.—You
must make his peace, Mrs. Malaprop;—you must
tell her 'tis Jack's way—tell her 'tis all our ways—
it runs in the blood of our family!—Come, get on,

Jack,—ha! ha! ha! Mrs. Malaprop—a young
villain![Pushing him out.Mrs. Mal.O! Sir Anthony!—O fie, Captain![Exeunt severally.SCENE IV.The North-Parade.Enter Sir Lucius O'Trigger.Sir Luc.I wonder where this Capt. Absolute
hides himself.—Upon my conscience!—these officers
are always in one's way in love-affairs:—I remember
I might have married Lady Dorothy Carmine,
if it had not been for a little rogue of a Major,
who ran away with her before she could get a
sight of me!—And I wonder too what it is the
ladies can see in them to be so fond of them—unless
it be a touch of the old serpent in 'em, that makes
the little creatures be caught, like vipers with a bit
of red cloth.—Hah!—isn't this the Captain coming?
—faith it is!—There is a probability of succeeding
about that fellow, that is mighty provoking!
—Who the devil is he talking to?[Steps aside.Enter Capt. Absolute.Abs.To what fine purpose I have been plotting!
a noble reward for all my schemes, upon my
soul!—a little gypsey!—I did not think her romance
could have made her so d—n'd absurd
either—S'death, I never was in a worse humour in
my life!—I could cut my own throat, or any other
person's, with the greatest pleasure in the world!Sir Luc.O, faith! I'm in the luck of it—I never
could have found him in a sweeter temper for

my purpose—to be sure I'm just come in the nick!
now to enter into conversation with him, and so
quarrel genteelly. [Sir Lucius goes up to Absolute.
—With regard to that matter, Captain, I must
beg leave to differ in opinion with you.AbsUpon my word then, you must be a very
subtle disputant:—because, Sir, I happen'd just
then to be giving no opinion at all.Sir Luc.That's no reason.—For give me leave
to tell you, a man may think an untruth as well
as speak one.Abs.Very true, Sir, but if the man never utters
his thoughts, I should think they might stand a
chance of escaping controversy.Sir Luc.Then, Sir, you differ in opinion with
me, which amounts to the same thing.Abs.Hark'ee, Sir Lucius,—if I had not before
known you to be a gentleman, upon my soul, I
should not have discovered it at this interview:—
for what you can drive at, unless you mean to
quarrel with me, I cannot conceive!Sir Luc.I humbly thank you, Sir, for the
quickness of your apprehension,
[Bowing.
—you have nam'd the very thing I would be at.Abs.Very well, Sir—I shall certainly not baulk
your inclinations:—but I should be glad you
would please to explain your motives.Sir Luc.Pray, Sir, be easy—the quarrel is a very
pretty quarrel as it stands—we should only spoil
it, by trying to explain it.—However, your memory
is very short—or you could not have forgot
an affront you pass'd on me within this week.—So
no more, but name your time and place.Abs.Well, Sir, since you are so bent on it, the
sooner the better;—let it be this evening—here,
by the Spring-Gardens.—We shall scarcely be interrupted.Sir Luc.Faith! that same interruption in affairs
of this nature, shews very great ill-breeding.—
I don't know what's the reason, but in England, if
a thing of this kind gets wind, people make such
a pother, that a gentleman can never fight in peace
and quietness.—However, if it's the same to you,
Captain, I should take it as a particular kindness,
if you'd let us meet in King's-Mead-Fields, as
a little business will call me there about six o'clock,
and I may dispatch both matters at once.Abs.'Tis the same to me exactly.—A little after
six, then we will discuss this matter more seriously.Sir Luc.If you please, Sir, there will be very
pretty small-sword light, tho' it won't do for a
long shot.—So that matter's settled! and my mind's
at ease.[Exit Sir Lucius.Enter Faulkland, meeting Absolute.Abs.Well met.—I was going to look for you.—
O, Faulkand! all the Daemons of spite and disappointment
have conspired against me! I'm so
vex'd, that if I had not the prospect of a resource
in being knock'd o'the head by and bye, I should
scarce have spirits to tell you the cause.Faulk.What can you mean?—Has Lydia
chang'd her mind?—I should have thought her
duty and inclination would now have pointed to
the same object.Abs.Aye, just as the eyes do of a person who
squints:—when her love-eye was fix'd on me—
t'other—her eye of duty, was finely obliqued:—but
when duty bid her point that the same way—off
t'other turn'd on a swivel, and secured its retreat
with a frown!Faulk.But what's the resource you—Abs.O, to wind up the whole, a good natured
Irishman here has (mimicking Sir Lucius) beg'd

leave to have the pleasure of cutting my throat—
and I mean to indulge him—that's all.Faulk.Prithee, be serious.Abs.'Tis fact, upon my soul.—Sir Lucius
O'Trigger—you know him by sight—for some
affront, which I am sure I never intended, has
obliged me to meet him this evening at six o'clock:
—'tis on that account I wish'd to see you—you
must go with me.Faulk.Nay, there must be some mistake, sure.
—Sir Lucius shall explain himself—and I dare say
matters may be accommodated:—but this evening,
did you say?—I wish it had been any other
time.Abs.Why?—there will be light enough:—
there will (as Sir Lucius says) "be very pretty
small-sword light, tho' it won't do for a long
shot."—Confound his long shots!Faulk.But I am myself a good deal ruffled, by
a difference I have had with Julia—my vile tormenting
temper has made me treat her so cruelly,
that I shall not be myself till we are reconciled.Abs.By Heav'ns, Faulkland, you don't deserve
her.Enter Servant, gives Faulkland a letter.Faulk.O Jack! this is from Julia—I dread to
open it—I fear it may be to take a last leave—
perhaps to bid me return her letters—and restore
—O! how I suffer for my folly!Abs.Here—let me see.[Takes the letter and opens it.Aye, a final sentence indeed!—'tis all over with
you, faith!Faulk.Nay, Jack—don't keep me in suspence.Abs.Hear then.—As I am convinced that my
dear Faulkland's own reflections have already upbraided

braided him for his last unkindness to me, I will not
add a word on the subject.—I wish to speak with you
as soon as possible.—Your's ever and truly, Julia.—There's stubbornness and resentment for you![Gives him the letter.Why, man, you don't seem one whit the happier
at this.Faulk.O, yes, I am—but—but—Abs.Confound your buts.—You never hear any
thing that would make another man bless himself,
but you immediately d—n it with a but.Faulk.Now, Jack, as you are my friend, own
honestly—don't you think there is something forward
—something indelicate in this haste to forgive?
—Women should never sue for reconciliation:
—that should always come from us.—They
should retain their coldness till woo'd to kindness—
and their pardon, like their love, should not unsought
be won.Abs.I have not patience to listen to you:—
thou'rt incorrigible!—so say no more on the subject.
—I must go to settle a few matters—let me see
you before six—remember—at my lodgings.—
A poor industrious devil like me, who have toil'd,
and drudg'd, and plotted to gain my ends, and am
at last disappointed by other people's folly—may
in pity be allowed to swear and grumble a little;—
but a captious sceptic in love,—a slave to fretfulness
and whim—who has no difficulties but of his
own creating—is a subject more fit for ridicule
than compassion![Exit Absolute.Faulk.I feel his reproaches!—yet I would not
change this too exquisite nicety, for the gross content
with which he tramples on the thorns of love.
—His engaging me in this duel, has started an
idea in my head, which I will instantly pursue.—
I'll use it as the touch-stone of Julia's sincerity and

disinterestedness—if her love prove pure and sterling
ore—my name will rest on it with honour!—
and once I've stamp'd it there, I lay aside my doubts
for ever:—but if the dross of selfishness, the allay
of pride predominate—'twill be best to leave
her as a toy for some less cautious Fool to sigh for.[Exit Faulkland.END OF THE FOURTH ACT.ACT V.SCENE I.Julia's Dressing-Room.Julia, sola.How this message has alarmed me! what dreadful
accident can he mean! why such charge to be
alone?—O Faulkland!—how many unhappy
moments!—how many tears have you cost me!Enter Faulkland, muffled up in a Riding-coat.Jul.What means this?—why this caution,
Faulkland?Faulk.Alas! Julia, I am come to take a long
farewell.Jul.Heav'ns! what do you mean?Faulk.You see before you a wretch, whose life
is forfeited.—Nay, start not!—the infirmity of my
temper has drawn all this misery on me.—I left you
fretful and passionate—an untoward accident drew
me into a quarrel—the event is, that I must fly
this kingdom instantly.—O Julia, had I been so
fortunate as to have call'd you mine intirely, before
this mischance had fallen on me, I should not so
deeply dread my banishment!—But no more of
that—your heart and promise were given to one
happy in friends, character, and station! they are
not bound to wait upon a solitary, guilty exile.Jul.My soul is oppress'd with sorrow at the
nature of your misfortune: had these adverse circumstances
arisen from a less fatal cause, I should
have felt strong comfort in the thought that I could
now chase from your bosom every doubt of the
warm sincerity of my love.—My heart has long
known no other guardian—I now entrust my person
to your honour—we will fly together.—When
safe from pursuit, my Father's will may be fulfilled
—and I receive a legal claim to be the partner
of your sorrows, and tenderest comforter. Then
on the bosom of your wedded Julia, you may lull
your keen regret to slumbering; while virtuous
love, with a Cherub's hand, shall smooth the brow
of upbraiding thought, and pluck the thorn from
compunction.Faulk.O Julia! I am bankrupt in gratitude!
but the time is so pressing, it calls on you for so
hasty a resolution.—Would you not wish some
hours to weigh the advantages you forego, and
what little compensation poor Faulkland can make
you beside his solitary love?Jul.I ask not a moment.—No, Faulkland, I
have lov'd you for yourself: and if I now, more
than ever, prize the solemn engagement which so
long has pledged us to each other, it is because it
leaves no room for hard aspersions on my fame,
and puts the seal of duty to an act of love.—But
let us not linger.—Perhaps this delay—Faulk.'Twill be better I should not venture out
again till dark.—Yet am I griev'd to think what
numberless distresses will press heavy on your gentle
disposition!Jul.Perhaps your fortune may be forfeited by
this unhappy act.—I know not whether 'tis so—
but sure that alone can never make us unhappy.—
The little I have will be sufficient to support us;
and exile never should be splendid.Faulk.Aye, but in such an abject state of life,
my wounded pride perhaps may increase the natural
fretfulness of my temper, till I become a
rude, morose companion, beyond your patience to
endure. Perhaps the recollection of a deed, my
conscience cannot justify, may haunt me in such
gloomy and unsocial fits, that I shall hate the tenderness
that would relieve me, break from your
arms, and quarrel with your fondness!Jul.If your thoughts should assume so unhappy
a bent, you will the more want some mild and affectionate
spirit to watch over and console you:—
One who, by bearing your infirmities with gentleness
and resignation, may teach you so to bear the
evils of your fortune.Faulk.O Julia, I have proved you to the quick!
and with this useless device I throw away all my
doubts. How shall I plead to be forgiven this last
unworthy effect of my restless, unsatisfied disposition?Jul.Has no such disaster happened as you related?Faulk.I am ashamed to own that it was all pretended;
yet in pity, Julia, do not kill me with resenting
a fault which never can be repeated: But
sealing, this once, my pardon, let me to-morrow,
in the face of Heaven, receive my future guide
and monitress, and expiate my past folly, by years
of tender adoration.Jul.Hold, Faulkland!—that you are free from
a crime, which I before fear'd to name, Heaven
knows how sincerely I rejoice!—These are tears of
thankfulness for that! But that your cruel doubts
should have urged you to an imposition that has
wrung my heart, gives me now a pang, more keen
than I can express!Faulk.By Heav'ns! Julia—Jul.Yet hear me.—My Father lov'd you,
Faulkland! and you preserv'd the life that tender
parent gave me; in his presence I pledged my
hand—joyfully pledged it—where before I had
given my heart. When, soon after, I lost that parent,
it seem'd to me that Providence had, in Faulkland,
shewn me whither to transfer, without a
pause, my grateful duty, as well as my affection:
Hence I have been content to bear from you what
pride and delicacy would have forbid me from
another.—I will not upbraid you, by repeating how
you have trifled with my sincerity.—Faulk.I confess it all! yet hear—Jul.After such a year of trial—I might have
flattered myself that I should not have been insulted
with a new probation of my sincerity, as cruel as
unnecessary! A trick of such a nature, as to shew
me plainly, that when I thought you lov'd me
best, you even then regarded me as a mean dissembler;
an artful, prudent hypocrite.Faulk.Never! never!Jul.I now see it is not in your nature to be content,
or confident in love. With this conviction—
I never will be yours. While I had hopes that
my persevering attention, and unreproaching kindness
might in time reform your temper, I should
have been happy to have gain'd a dearer influence
over you; but I will not furnish you with a licensed
power to keep alive an incorrigible fault,
at the expence of one who never would contend
with you.Faulk.Nay, but Julia, by my soul and honour,
if after this—Jul.But one word more.—As my faith has once
been given to you, I never will barter it with another.
—I shall pray for your happiness with the
truest sincerity; and the dearest blessing I can ask of

Heaven to send you, will be to charm you from
that unhappy temper, which alone has prevented
the performance of our solemn engagement.—All I
request of you is, that you will yourself reflect upon
this infirmity, and when you number up the many
true delights it has deprived you of—let it not be
your least regret, that it lost you the love of one—
who would have follow'd you in beggary through
the world![Exit.Faulk.She's gone!—for ever!—There was an
awful resolution in her manner, that rivetted me
to my place.—O Fool!—Dolt!—Barbarian!—
Curst as I am, with more imperfections than my
fellow-wretches, kind Fortune sent a heaven-gifted
cherub to my aid, and, like a ruffian, I have
driven her from my side!—I must now haste to my
appointment.—Well my mind is tuned for such a
scene.—I shall wish only to become a principal in
it, and reverse the tale my cursed folly put me
upon forging here.—O Love!—Tormentor!—
Fiend!—whose influence, like the Moon's, acting
on men of dull souls, makes idiots of them, but
meeting subtler spirits, betrays their course, and
urges sensibility to madness![Exit.Enter Maid and Lydia.Maid.My Mistress, Ma'am, I know, was here
just now—perhaps she is only in the next room.[Exit Maid.Lyd.Heigh ho!—Though he has used me so,
this fellow runs strangely in my head. I believe
one lecture from my grave Cousin will make me
recall him.Enter Julia.Lyd.O Julia, I am come to you with such an
appetite for consolation.—Lud! Child, what's the
matter with you?—You have been crying!—I'll

be hanged, if that Faulkland has not been tormenting
you!Jul.You mistake the cause of my uneasiness.—
Something has flurried me a little.—Nothing that
you can guess at.—I would not accuse Faulkland
to a Sister!(Aside.)Lyd.Ah! whatever vexations you may have, I
can assure you mine surpass them.—You know
who Beverley proves to be?Jul.I will now own to you, Lydia, that Mr.
Faulkland had before inform'd me of the whole
affair. Had young Absolute been the person you
took him for, I should not have accepted your
confidence on the subject, without a serious endeavour
to counteract your caprice.Lyd.So, then, I see I have been deceived by
every one!—but I don't care—I'll never have him.Jul.Nay, Lydia—Lyd.Why, is it not provoking; when I thought
we were coming to the prettiest distress imaginable,
to find myself made a mere Smithfield bargain
of at last—There had I projected one of
the most sentimental elopements!—so becoming a
disguise!—so amiable a ladder of Ropes!—Conscious
Moon—four horses—Scotch parson—with
such surprise to Mrs. Malaprop—and such paragraphs
in the News-papers!—O, I shall die with
disappointment.Jul.I don't wonder at it!Lyd.Now—sad reverse!—what have I to expect,
but, after a deal of flimsy preparation with
a bishop's licence, and my Aunt's blessing, to go
simpering up to the Altar; or perhaps be cried
three times in a country-church, and have an unmannerly
fat clerk ask the consent of every butcher
in the parish to join John Absolute and Lydia Languish,
Spinster! O, that I should live to hear myself
called Spinster!Jul.Melancholy, indeed!Lyd.How mortifying, to remember the dear
delicious shifts I used to be put to, to gain half a
minute's conversation with this fellow!—How
often have I stole forth, in the coldest night in January,
and found him in the garden, stuck like a
dripping statue!—There would he kneel to me
in the snow, and sneeze and cough so pathetically!
he shivering with cold, and I with apprehension!
and while the freezing blast numb'd our joints,
how warmly would he press me to pity his flame,
and glow with mutual ardour!—Ah, Julia! that
was something like being in love.Jul.If I were in spirits, Lydia, I should chide
you only by laughing heartily at you: but it suits
more the situation of my mind, at present, earnestly
to entreat you, not to let a man, who loves you
with sincerity, suffer that unhappiness from your
caprice, which I know too well caprice can inflict.Lyd.O Lud! what has brought my Aunt here!Enter Mrs. Malaprop, Fag, and David.Mrs. Mal.So! so! here's fine work!—here's
fine suicide, paracide, and salivation going on in
the fields! and Sir Anthony not to be found to
prevent the antistrophe!Jul.For Heaven's sake, Madam, what's the
meaning of this?Mrs. Mal.That gentleman can tell you—'twas
he enveloped the affair to me.Lyd.Do, Sir, will you inform us.(To Fag.)Fag.Ma'am, I should hold myself very deficient
in every requisite that forms the man of breeding,
if I delay'd a moment to give all the information
in my power to a lady so deeply interested in the
affair as you are.Lyd.But quick! quick, Sir!Fag.True, Ma'am, as you say, one should be
quick in divulging matters of this nature; for
should we be tedious, perhaps while we are flourishing
on the subject, two or three lives may be lost!Lyd.O patience!—Do, Ma'am, for Heaven's
sake! tell us what is the matter?Mrs. Mal.Why, murder's the matter! slaughter's
the matter! killing's the matter!—but he can
tell you the perpendiculars.Lyd.Then, prythee, Sir, be brief.Why then, Ma'am—as to murder—I canake upon me to say—and as to slaughter, or
man-slaughter, that will be as the jury finds it.Lyd.But who, Sir—who are engaged in this?Fag.Faith, Ma'am, one is a young gentleman
whom I should be very sorry any thing was to happen
to—a very pretty behaved gentleman!—We
have lived much together, and always on terms.Lyd.But who is this? who! who! who!Fag.My Master, Ma'am—my Master—I speak
of my Master.Lyd.Heavens! What, Captain Absolute!Mrs. Mal.O, to be sure, you are frightened
now!Jul.But who are with him, Sir?Fag.As to the rest, Ma'am, his gentleman can
inform you better than I.Jul.Do speak, friend.(To David.)David.Look'ee, my Lady—by the Mass!
there's mischief going on.—Folks don't use to
meet for amusement with fire-arms, firelocks,
fire-engines, fire-screens, fire-office, and the devil
knows what other crackers besides!—This, my
Lady, I say, has an angry favour.Jul.But who is there beside Captain Absolute,
friend?David.My poor Master—under favour, for
mentioning him first.—You know me, my Lady—

I am David—and my Master of course is, or was
Squire Acres.—Then comes Squire Faulkland.Jul.Do, Ma'am, let us instantly endeavour to
prevent mischief.Mrs. Mal.O fie—it would be very inelegant in
us:—we should only participate things.Dav.Ah! do, Mrs. Aunt, save a few lives—
they are desperately given, believe me.—Above
all, there is that blood-thirsty Philistine, Sir Lucius
O'Trigger.Mrs. Mal.Sir Lucius O'Trigger!—O mercy!
have they drawn poor little dear Sir Lucius into the
scrape?—why, how you stand, girl! you have no
more e eling than one of the Derbyshire Putrefactions!Lyd.What are we to do, Madam?Mrs. Mal.Why, fly with the utmost felicity
to be sure, to prevent mischief:—here, friend—
you can shew us the place?Fag.If you please, Ma'am, I will conduct you.
—David, do you look for Sir Anthony.[Exit David.Mrs. Mal.Come, girls!—this gentleman will
exhort us.—Come, Sir, you're our envoy—lead the
way, and we'll precede.Fag.Not a step before the ladies for the world!Mrs. Mal.You're sure you know the spot.Fag.I think I can find it, Ma'am; and one good
thing is, we shall hear the report of the pistols as
we draw near, so we can't well miss them; never
fear, Ma'am, never fear.[Exeunt, he talking.SCENE II.South-Parade.Enter Absolute, putting his sword under his greatcoat.Abs.A sword seen in the streets of Bath would
raise as great an alarm as a mad-dog.—How provoking
this is in Faulkland!—never punctual! I
shall be obliged to go without him at last.—O, the
devil! here's Sir Anthony!—how shall I escape
him?[Muffles up his face, and takes a circle to
go off.Enter Sir Anthony.Sir Anth.How one may be deceived at a little
distance! only that I see he don't know me, I
could have sworn that was Jack!—Hey!—'Gad's
life; it is.—Why, Jack, you Dog!—what are you
afraid of?—hey! sure I'm right.—Why, Jack—
Jack Absolute![Goes up to him.Abs.Really, Sir, you have the advantage of me:
—I don't remember ever to have had the honour
—my name is Saunderson, at your service.Sir Anth.Sir, I beg your pardon—I took you—
hey!—why, z—ds! it is—Stay—[Looks up to his face.So, so—your humble servant, Mr. Saunderson!—
Why, you scoundrel, what tricks are you after
now?Abs.O! a joke, Sir, a joke!—I came here on
purpose to look for you, Sir.Sir Anth.You did! well, I am glad you were
so lucky:—but what are you muffled up so for?
—what's this for?—hey?Abs.Tis cool, Sir; isn't it?—rather chilly somehow—

but I shall be late—I have a particular
engagement.Sir Anth.Stay.—why, I thought you were looking
for me?—Pray, Jack, where is't you are going?Abs.Going, Sir!Sir Anth.Aye—where are you going?Abs.Where am I going?Sir Anth.You unmannerly puppy!Abs.I was going, Sir, to—to—to—to Lydia—
Sir to Lydia—to make matters up if I could;—
and I was looking for you, Sir, to—to—Sir Anth.To go with you, I suppose—Well,
come along.Abs.O! z—ds! no, Sir, not for the world!—
I wish'd to meet with you, Sir, to—to—to—
You find it cool, I'm sure, Sir—you'd better not
stay out.Sir Anth.Cool!—not at all—Well, Jack—and
what will you say to Lydia?Abs.O, Sir, beg her pardon, humour her—promise
and vow:—but I detain you, Sir—consider
the cold air on your gout.Sir Anth.O, not at all!—not at all!—I'm in no
hurry.—Ah! Jack, you youngsters when once
you are wounded here.[Putting his hand to Absolute's breast.Hey! what the deuce have you got here?Abs.Nothing, Sir—nothing.Sir Anth.What's this?—here's something d—d
hard!Abs.O, trinkets, Sir! trinkets—a bauble for
Lydia!Sir Anth.Nay, let me see your taste.[Pulls his coat open, the sword falls.Trinkets!—a bauble for Lydia!—z—ds! sirrah,
you are not going to cut her throat, are you?Abs.Ha! ha! ha!—I thought it would divert

you, Sir, tho' I didn't mean to tell you till afterwards.Sir Anth.You didn't?—Yes, this is a very diverting
trinket, truly.Abs.Sir, I'll explain to you.—You know, Sir,
Lydia is romantic—dev'lish romantic, and very
absurd of course:—now, Sir, I intend, if she refuses
to forgive me—to unsheath this sword—and
swear—I'll fall upon its point, and expire at her
feet!Sir Anth.Fall upon fiddle-sticks end!—why,
I suppose it is the very thing that would please
her—Get along, you Fool.—Abs.Well, Sir, you shall hear of my success—
you shall hear.—"O, Lydia!—forgive me, or
this pointed steel"—says I.Sir Anth."O, Booby! stab away, and welcome"
—says she—Get along!—and d—n your trinkets![Exit Absolute.Enter David, running.Dav.Stop him! stop him! Murder! Thief!
Fire!—Stop fire! Stop fire!—O! Sir Anthony—
call! call! bid 'em stop! Murder! Fire!Sir Anth.Fire! Murder! where?Dav.Oons! he's out of sight! and I'm out of
breath, for my part! O, Sir Anthony, why didn't
you stop him? why didn't you stop him?Sir Anth.Z—ds! the fellow's mad!—Stop
whom? stop Jack?Dav.Aye, the Captain, Sir!—there's murder and
slaughter—Sir Ant.Murder!Dav.Aye, please you, Sir Anthony, there's all
kinds of murder, all sorts of slaughter to be seen
in the fields: there's fighting going on, Sir—
bloody sword-and-gun fighting!Sir Anth.Who are going to fight, Dunce?Dav.Every body that I know of, Sir Anthony:
—every body is going to fight, my poor Master,
Sir Lucius O'Trigger, your son, the Captain—Sir Anth.O, the Dog!—I see his tricks:—do
you know the place?Dav.King's-Mead-Fields.Sir Anth.You know the way?Dav.Not an inch;—but I'll call the Mayor—
Aldermen—Constables—Church-wardens—and
Beadles—we can't be too many to part them.Sir Anth.Come along—give me your shoulder!
we'll get assistance as we go—the lying villain!—
Well, I shall be in such a phrenzy—So—this was
the history of his d—d trinkets! I'll bauble him![Exeunt.SCENE III.King's-Mead-Fields.Sir Lucius and Acres, with pistols.Acres.By my valour! then, Sir Lucius, forty
yards is a good distance—Odds levels and aims!—
I say it is a good distance.Sir Luc.Is it for muskets or small field-pieces?
upon my conscience, Mr. Acres, you must leave
those things to me.—Stay now—I'll shew you.
[Measures paces along the stage.
there now, that is a very pretty distance—a pretty
gentleman's distance.Acres.Z—ds! we might as well fight in a sentrybox!
—I tell you, Sir Lucius, the farther he is off,
the cooler I shall take my aim.Sir Luc.Faith! then I suppose you would aim
at him best of all if he was out of sight!Acres.No, Sir Lucius—but I should think forty
or eight and thirty yards—Sir Luc.Pho! pho! nonsense! three or four

feet between the mouths of your pistols is as good
as a mile.Acres.Odds bullets, no!—by my valour! there is
no merit in killing him so near:—do, my dear Sir
Lucius, let me bring him down at a long shot:—
a long shot, Sir Lucius, if you love me!Sir Luc.Well—the gentleman's friend and I
must settle that.—But tell me now, Mr. Acres, in
case of an accident, is there any little will or commission
I could execute for you?Acres.I am much obliged to you, Sir Lucius—
but I don't understand—Sir Luc.Why, you may think there's no being
shot at without a little risk—and if an unlucky
bullet should carry a Quietus with it—I say it will
be no time then to be bothering you about family
matters.Acres.A Quietus!Sir Luc.For instance now—if that should be
the case—would you chuse to be pickled and sent
home?—or would it be the same to you to lie here
in the Abbey?—I'm told there is very snug lying
in the Abbey.Acres.Pickled!—Snug lying in the Abbey!—
Odds tremors! Sir Lucius, don't talk so!Sir Luc.I suppose, Mr. Acres, you never were
engaged in an affair of this kind before?Acres.No, Sir Lucius, never before.Sir Luc.Ah! that's a pity!—there's nothing like
being used to a thing.—Pray now, how would you
receive the gentleman's shot?Acres.Odds files!—I've practised that—there,
Sir Lucius—there
[Puts himself in an attitude.
—a side-front, hey?—Odd! I'll make myself
small enough:—I'll stand edge-ways.Sir Luc.Now—you're quite out—for if you
stand so when I take my aim—[Levelling at him.Acres.Z—ds! Sir Lucius—are you sure it is
not cock'd?Sir Luc.Never fear.Acres.But—but—you don't know—it may go
off of its own head!Sir Luc.Pho! be easy—Well, now if I hit you
in the body, my bullet has a double chance—for
if it misses a vital part on your right side—'twill
be very hard if it don't succeed on the left!Acres.A vital part! O, my poor vitals!Sir Luc.But, there—fix yourself so—
[Placing him.
let him see the broad side of your full front—there
—now a ball or two may pass clear thro' your
body, and never do any harm at all.Acres.Clean thro' me!—a ball or two clean
thro' me!Sir Luc.Aye—may they—and it is much the
genteelest attitude into the bargain.Acres.Look'ee! Sir Lucius—I'd just as leive
be shot in an aukward posture as a genteel one—
so, by my valour! I will stand edge-waysSir Luc.(Looking at his watch.) Sure they
don't mean to disappoint us.—Hah?—no faith—I
think I see them coming.Acres.Hey!—what!—coming!—Sir Luc.Aye—Who are those yonder getting
over the stile?Acres.There are two of them, indeed!—well—
let them come—hey, Sir Lucius!—we—we—we
—we—won't run.—Sir Luc.Run!Acres.No—I say—we won't run, by my valour!Sir Luc.What the devil's the matter with you?Acres.Nothing—nothing—my dear friend—
my dear Sir Lucius—but—I-I-I don't feel quite
so bold, somehow—as I did.Sir Luc.O fie!—consider your honour.Acres.Aye—true—my honour—Do, Sir Lucius,
hedge in a word or two every now and then
about my honour.Sir Luc.Well, here they're coming.[Looking.Acres.Sir Lucius—if I wa'n't with you, I should
almost think I was afraid—if my valour should
leave me!—Valour will come and go.Sir Luc.Then, pray keep it fast, while you have it.Acres.Sir Lucius—I doubt it is going—yes—
my valour is certainly going!—it is sneaking off!—
I feel it oozing out as it were at the palms of my
hands!Sir Luc.Your honour—your honour—Here
they are.Acres.O mercy!—now—that I were safe at
Clod-Hall! or could be shot before I was aware!Enter Faulkland and Absolute.Sir Luc.Gentlemen, your most obedient—hah!
—what Captain Absolute!—So, I suppose, Sir,
you are come here, just like myself—to do a kind
office, first for your friend—then to proceed to
business on your own account.Acres.What, Jack!—my dear Jack!—my
dear friend!Abs.Heark'ee, Bob, Beverley's at hand.Sir Luc.Well, Mr. Acres—I don't blame your
saluting the gentleman civilly.—So, Mr. Beverley,
(to Faulkland) if you'll chuse your weapons, the
Captain and I will measure the ground.Faulk.My weapons, Sir.Acres.Odds life! Sir Lucius, I'm not going to
fight Mr. Faulkland; these are my particular
friends.Sir Luc.What, Sir, did not you come here to
fight Mr. Acres?Faulk.Not I, upon my word, Sir.Sir Luc.Well, now, that's mighty provoking!
But I hope, Mr. Faulkland, as there are three of
us come on purpose for the game—you won't be
so cantanckerous as to spoil the party by sitting
out.Abs.O pray, Faulkland, fight to oblige Sir
Lucius.Faulk.Nay, if Mr. Acres is so bent on the
matter.Acres.No, no, Mr. Faulkland—I'll bear my
disappointment like a Christian—Look'ee, Sir Lucius,
there's no occasion at all for me to fight; and
if it is the same to you, I'd as lieve let it alone.Sir Luc.Observe me, Mr. Acres—I must not
be trifled with. You have certainly challenged
somebody—and you came here to fight him—
Now, if that gentleman is willing to represent him
—I can't see, for my soul, why it isn't just the
same thing.Acres.Z—ds, Sir Lucius—I tell you, 'tis one
Beverley I've challenged—a fellow, you see, that
dare not shew his face! If he were here, I'd make
him give up his pretensions directly!—Abs.Hold, Bob—let me set you right—there
is no such man as Beverley in the case.—The person
who assumed that name is before you; and as
his pretensions are the same in both characters, he
is ready to support them in whatever way you
please.Sir Luc.Well, this is lucky—Now you have an
opportunity—Acres.What, quarrel with my dear friend Jack
Absolute—not if he were fifty Beverleys! Z—ds!
Sir Lucius, you would not have me be so unnatural.Sir Luc.Upon my conscience, Mr. Acres, your
valour has oozed away with a vengeance!Acres.Not in the least! Odds Backs and Abettors!
I'll be your second with all my heart—and

if you should get a Quietus, you may command
me entirely. I'll get you a snug lying in the Abbey
here; or pickle you, and send you over to
Blunderbuss-hall, or any of the kind with the
greatest pleasure.Sir Luc.Pho! pho! you are little better than
a coward.Acres.Mind, gentlemen, he calls me a Coward;
Coward was the word, by my valour!Sir Luc.Well, Sir?Acres.Look'ee, Sir Lucius, 'tisn't that I mind
the word Coward—Coward may be said in joke.—
But if you had call'd me a Poltroon, Odds Daggers
and Balls!Sir Luc.Well, Sir?Acres.—I should have thought you a very
ill-bred man.Sir Luc.Pho! you are beneath my notice.Abs.Nay, Sir Lucius, you can't have a better
second than my friend, Acres—He is a most determined
dog—call'd in the country, Fighting
Bob.—He generally kills a man a week; don't
you, Bob?Acres.Aye—at home!Sir Luc.Well then, Captain, 'tis we must begin
—so come out, my little counsellor,
[draws his sword.
and ask the gentleman, whether he will resign the
lady, without forcing you to proceed against him?Abs.Come on then, Sir; (draws) since you won't
let it be an amicable suit, here's my reply.[Enter Sir Anthony, David, and the Women.David.Knock 'em all down, sweet Sir Anthony,
knock down my Master in particular—
and bind his hands over to their good behaviour!Sir Anth.Put up, Jack, put up, or I shall be
in a frenzy—how came you in a duel, Sir?Abs.Faith, Sir, that gentleman can tell you
better than I; 'twas he call'd on me, and you
know, Sir, I serve his Majesty.Sir Anth.Here's a pretty fellow; I catch him
going to cut a man's throat, and he tells me, he
serves his Majesty!—Zounds! sirrah, then how
durst you draw the King's sword against one of his
subjects?Abs.Sir, I tell you! That gentleman call'd
me out, without explaining his reasons.Sir Anth.Gad! Sir, how came you to call my
son out, without explaining your reasons?Sir Luc,Your son, Sir, insulted me in a manner
which my honour could not brook.Sir Anth.Zounds! Jack, how durst you insult
the gentleman in a manner which his honour could
not brook?Mrs. Mal.Come, come, let's have no Honour
before ladies—Captain Absolute, come here—How
could you intimidate us so?—Here's Lydia has been
terrified to death for you.Abs.For fear I should be kill'd, or escape,
Ma'am?Mrs. Mal.Nay, no delusions to the past—Lydia
is convinc'd; speak child.Sir Luc.With your leave, Ma'am, I must put
in a word here—I believe I could interpret the
young lady's silence—Now mark—Lyd.What is it you mean, Sir?Sir Luc.Come, come, Delia, we must be serious
now—this is no time for trifling.Lyd.'Tis true, Sir; and your reproof bids me
offer this gentleman my hand, and solicit the return
of his affections.Abs.O! my little angel, say you so?—Sir Lucius
—I perceive there must be some mistake here
—with regard to the affront which you affirm I
have given you—I can only say, that it could not
have been intentional.—And as you must be convinced,

that I should not fear to support a real injury
—you shall now see that I am not ashamed to
atone for an inadvertency—I ask your pardon.—
But for this lady, while honour'd with her approbation,
I will support my claim against any man
whatever.Sir Anth.Well said, Jack, and I'll stand by you,
my Boy.Acres.Mind, I give up all my claim—I make
no pretensions to any thing in the world—and if I
can't get a wife, without fighting for her, by my
Valour! I'll live a bachelor.Sir Luc.Captain, give me your hand—an affront
handsomely acknowledged becomes an obligation
—and as for the Lady—if she chuses to deny
her own hand writing here—(Taking out letters.)Mrs. Mal.O, he will desolve my mystery!—Sir
Lucius, perhaps there's some mistake—perhaps, I
can illuminate—Sir Luc.Pray, old gentlewoman, don't interfere,
where you have no business.—Miss Languish,
are you my Delia, or not?Lyd.Indeed, Sir Lucius, I am not.(Lydia and Absolute walk aside.)Mrs. Mal.Sir Lucius O'Trigger—ungrateful
as you are—I own the soft impeachment—pardon
my blushes, I am Delia.Sir Luc.You Delia—pho! pho! be easy.Mrs. Mal.Why, thou barbarous Vandyke—
those letters are mine—When you are more sensible
of my benignity—perhaps I may be brought
to encourage your addresses.Sir Luc.Mrs. Malaprop, I am extremely sensible
of your condescension; and whether you or Lucy
have put this trick upon me, I am equally beholden
to you.—And to shew you I'm not ungrateful,
Captain Absolute! since you have taken
that lady from me, I'll give you my Delia into the
bargain.Abs.I am much obliged to you, Sir Lucius;
but here's our friend, fighting Bob, unprovided
for.Sir Luc.Hah! little Valour—here, will you
make your fortune?Acres.Odds Wrinkles! No.—But give us your
hand, Sir Lucius, forget and forgive; but if ever
I give you a chance of pickling me again, say Bob
Acres is a Dunce, that's all.Sir Anth.Come, Mrs. Malaprop, don't be cast
down—you are in your bloom yet.Mrs. Mal.O Sir Anthony!—men are all barbarians—(All retire but Julia and Faulkland.)Jul.He seems dejected and unhappy—not sullen
—there was some foundation, however, for the
tale he told me—O woman! how true should be
your judgment, when your resolution is so weak!Faulk.Julia!—how can I sue for what I so little
deserve? I dare not presume—yet Hope is the
child of Penitence.Jul.Oh! Faulkland, you have not been more
faulty in your unkind treatment of me, than I am
now in wanting inclination to resent it. As my
heart honestly bids me place my weakness to the
account of love, I should be ungenerous not to
admit the same plea for your's.Faulk.Now I shall be blest indeed!(Sir Anthony comes forward.)Sir Anth.What's going on here?—So you have
been quarrelling too, I warrant.—Come, Julia,
I never interfered before; but let me have a hand in
the matter at last.—All the faults I have ever seen
in my friend Faulkland, seemed to proceed from
what he calls the delicacy and warmth of his affection
for you—There, marry him directly, Julia,
you'll find he'll mend surprisingly!(The rest come forward.)Sir Luc.Come now, I hope there is no dissatisfied
person, but what is content; for as I have

been disappointed myself, it will be very hard if I
have not the satisfaction of seeing other people succeed
better—Acres.You are right, Sir Lucius.—So, Jack, I
wish you joy—Mr. Faulkland the same.—Ladies,
—come now, to shew you I'm neither vex'd nor
angry, Odds Tabors and Pipes! I'll order the fiddles
in half an hour, to the New Rooms—and I insist on
you all meeting me there.Sir Anth.Gad! Sir, I like your spirit; and at
night we single lads will drink a health to the
young couples, and a husband to Mrs. Malaprop.Faulk.Our partners are stolen from us, Jack—
I hope to be congratulated by each other—yours
for having checked in time, the errors of an illdirected
Imagination, which might have betray'd
an innocent heart; and mine, for having, by her
gentleness and candour, reformed the unhappy
temper of one, who by it made wretched whom
he loved most, and tortured the heart he ought to
have ador'd.Abs.Well, Jack, we have both tasted the Bitters,
as well as the Sweets, of Love—with this difference
only, that you always prepared the bitter
cup for yourself, while I—Lyd.Was always obliged to me for it, hey!
Mr. Modesty?—But come, no more of that—
our happiness is now as unallay'd as general.Jul.Then let us study to preserve it so: and
while Hope pictures to us a flattering scene of future
Bliss, let us deny its pencil those colours which
are too bright to be lasting.—When Hearts deserving
Happiness would unite their fortune, Virtue
would crown them with an unfading garland of modest,
hurtless flowers; but ill-judging Passion will
force the gaudier Rose into the wreath, whose
thorn offends them, when its Leaves are dropt!