HYMNS FOUNDED ON VARIOUS TEXTS IN THE HOLY SCRIPTURES.By the late Reverend PHILIP DODDRIDGE, D. D.Published from the AUTHOR's Manuscript By JOB ORTON.I esteem Nepos for his Faith and Diligence, his Comments on Scripture, and many Hymns, with which the Brethren are delighted.
Euseb. Eccl. Hist. L. 7. C. 24.SALOP, Printed by J. EDDOWES and J. COTTON: And Sold by J. WAUGH and W. FENNER, at the Turk's Head in Lombard Street; and J. BUCKLAND, at the Buck in Pater-noster Row, LONDON. M.DCC.LV.THE PREFACE.THE Author of the following HYMNS, well known to the World by many. excellent and useful Writings, was much sollicited by his Friends to print them in his Life-time, from a Hope they might be serviceable to the Interest of Religion by assisting the Devotion of Christians in their social and secret Worship; and, had GOD continued his Life till his FAMILY-EXPOSITOR on the Epistles had been published, it is probable he would have complied with their Request: But this and many other pious and benevolent Purposes were broken off by his much-lamented th. During the last Hour I spent

with him, a few Weeks before that mournful Event, he honoured me with some particular Directions about transcribing and publishing them. I have at length, thro' the good Hand of my GOD upon me, finished them, and present them to the World with a chearful Hope, that they will promote and diffuse a Spirit of Devotion, and, together with other Assistances human and divine, prepare many to join with the devout Author in the nobler and everlasting Anthems of Heaven.These Hymns being composed to be sung, after the Author had been preaching on the Texts prefixed to them, it was his Design, that they should bring over again the leading Thoughts in the Sermon, and naturally express and warmly enforce those devout Sentiments, which he hoped were then rising in the Minds of his Hearers, and help to fix them on the Memory and Heart: Accordingly the attentive Reader will observe, that most of them illustrate such Sentiments, as a skillful Preacker would principally insist

upon, when discoursing from the Texts on which they are founded. There is a great Variety in the Form of them: Some are devout Paraphrases on the Texts: others expressive of lively Acts of Devotion, Faith, and Trust in GOD, Love to Christ, Desire of divine Influences, and good Resolutions of cultivating the Temper and practising the Duties recommended: Others proclaim an humble Joy and Triumph in the gracious Promises and Encouragements of Scripture, particularly in the Discovery and Prospect of eternal Life. The Nature of the Subjects will easily account for the Difference of Composure, why some are more plain and artless, others more lively, sublime, and full of poetick Fire. If any of them should at first Reading appear flat or obscure, it may well be supposed they would affect the Mind in a stronger Manner, when used in a religious Assembly after Sermons upon the Texts, in which the Context hath been considered (if that were necessary), parallel Places compared

the Design of the inspired Writer judiciously opened, and the Beauty, Propriety, and Emphasis of the several Clauses of the Text illustrated: They therefore who use them in their devout Retirements should first read and consider the Texts and Contexts; and if they would consult some Expositor upon them, particularly the Author's on the Subjects taken from the New Testament, they will see a Spirit and Elegance in these Composures, which may otherwise be overlooked, and be more likely to reap real and lasting Advantage by them.In this Collection there are many Hymns formed upon Passages in the Old Testament, particularly in the Prophets, directly relating to the Case of the Israelites, or some particular good Man among them, which the Author hath accommodated to the Circumstances of Christians, where he thought there was a just and natural Resemblance; and he apprehended, that the Practice of the inspired Writers of the New Testament warranted such Accommodations Compare Hebrews xiii. 5, 6. and Family Expositor in Loc. note (e). There are also some good Remarks on this Subject in Dr. Watts's Holiness of Times, Places, &c. Disc. v. especially Prop. 15..

He experienced this to be a very acceptable and useful Method of preaching on the Old Testament, and accordingly recommended it to his Pupils, as what would afford them an Opportunity of explaining the Design of the Prophecies, displaying the Wisdom, Faithfulness and Grace of GOD, and suggesting many striking and important Instructions: This Method would at the same Time occasion an agreeable Variety in their Discourses, prevent their confining themselves to general or common-place Subjects, or (in Order to avoid a frequent Repetition of well-known Arguments) running into dry and abstruse Speculations, which the Capacities of the Generality of their Hearers could not comprehend, nor their Hearts relish and feel: A Fashion in Preaching, too prevalent, and, considering its apparent Unprofitableness, much to be lamented.
Those young Ministers, who are desirous of entring into the Spirit and Copiousness of Scripture, may find this Work greatly useful to them, by directing them to many very suitable Texts, and to some natural Thoughts, and useful Reflections to be insisted upon in discoursing from them.There are several Hymns in this Collection suited to special and extraordinary Occasions, for which there was not before a sufficient Provision; such as, for opening a new Place of Worship, the Vacancy and Settlement of Churches, the Ordination of Ministers, their Removal from our World, &c. especially for Days of Fasting and Humiliation on Account of actual or apprehended Calamities, the Want of which, during the late Rebellion and War, was much regretted by many Ministers and private Christians.In these Composures I hope few low or trivial Expressions will be found: Nothing appears unsuitable to the Gravity and Dignity of a worshipping Assembly:

Nothing likely to darken or damp the Devotion of the humble Christian, or excite Passions merely sensual. There is nothing that savours of a Party Spirit, or carries an Appearance of designing to confine their Use to any of the Sects into which Christians are unhappily divided. The Materials are divine, and the Author's Soul was never more enlarged, than when he was promoting a Spirit of Piety and Candor in their just Connection.I chose to place these Hymns in the Order in which the several Texts lie in the Bible, as that prevents the Necessity of another Index, and there appeared no particular Reason for disposing them in any different Order. In a few Places, where Words occur not sufficiently intelligible to common Readers, I have added some more plain and familiar ones in the Margin, that they may be read and sung with Understanding; preferring this Method to that of some Authors, who have collected and explained them in a particular Index.
As these Hymns were composed during a Series of many Years, amidst an uncommon Variety and daily Succession of most important Labours, by a Man who had no Ear for Musick, and as they want his retouching Hand, the Reader will be candid to what Inaccuracies he may discover; particularly the Repetition of the same Thoughts and Phrases, which in a few Instances will be found: And indeed some of them could scarcely be avoided on Subjects so nearly resembling, without the Exclusion of the most suitable and affecting Sentiments or Aspirations, for which the Introduction of a new or more poetick Thought and Phrase would not have been an Equivalent. There may perhaps be some Improprieties, owing to my not being able to read the Author's Manuscript in particular Places, and being obliged, without a poetick Genius, to supply those Deficiences, whereby the Beauty of the Stanza may be greatly defaced, tho' the Sense is preserved.These Hymns being originally designed for the Use of a Congregation of plain unlearned

Christians, it cannot be expected they should entertain such, who may peruse them merely for the Sake of the Poetry: Yet I think many of them will stand the Test of a critical Examination, and appear at least equal to other Compositions of the like Kind; and I am perswaded they will all be delightful and beneficial to those, who desire to have their Devotions enlivened, their Souls filled with divine Love, and who are ambitious to live up to the Rules of the Gospel; and that they will, thro' the Influences of the Holy Ghost, spread a Spirit of fervent Piety in such Congregations where they may be introduced.I have nothing to add but my earnest Wishes and Prayers, that they may be subservient to the Glory of GOD, the more delightful Celebration of divine Ordinances, and the Edification of my Fellow-Christians. Amen.JOB ORTON.SALOP, Jan. 1. 1755.A TABLE TO FIND OUT ANY HYMN BY THE FIRST LINE OF IT.AACcept, Great GOD, thy Britain's Song Hymn 46Alas for Britain, and her Sons Hymn 186Alas how fast our Moments fly Hymn 127All-conqu'ring Faith, how high it rose Hymn 181All-glorious God, what Hymns of Praise Hymn 298All-hail, mysterious King Hymn 359All-hail, victorious Saviour, hail! Hymn 354Aloud I sing the wondrous Grace Hymn 217Amazing beauteous Change Hymn 100Amazing Grace of God on high Hymn 99Amazing Plan of sov'reign Love Hymn 124And are we now brought near to God Hymn 288And art thou with us, gracious Lord Hymn 98And doth the Son of God complain Hymn 104And is Salvation brought so near Hymn 262And shall we still be Slaves Hymn 227And why do our admiring Eyes Hymn 252And will the great eternal God Hymn 49And will the Judge descend Hymn 189And will the Majesty of Heaven Hymn 144And will th' eternal King Hymn 263Approach ye Children of your God Hymn 315A present God is all our Strength Hymn 18Arise, my tend'rest Thoughts arise Hymn 64Assist us, Lord, thy Name to praise Hymn 255Attend mine Ear, my Heart rejoice Hymn 187Attend, my Soul, the Voice divine Hymn 12Attend, my Soul, with reverend Awe Hymn 159Awake, my drowsy Soul, awake Hymn 199Awake, my Soul, stretch every Nerve Hymn 296Awake, my Soul, to meet the Day Hymn 362Awake, our Souls, and bless his Name Hymn 228Awake, ye Saints, and raise your Eyes Hymn 264BBAcksliding Israel, hear the Voice Hymn 122Behold God's great incarnate Son Hymn 337Behold I come, the Saviour cries Hymn 343Behold I come, the Saviour cries Hymn 361Behold, O Israel's God Hymn 141Behold our God, he owns his Name Hymn 86Behold th' amazing Sight Hymn 233Behold the bleeding Lamb of God Hymn 242Behold the Glass the Gospel lends Hymn 327Behold the gloomy Vale Hymn 32Behold the great eternal God Hymn 15Behold the great Physician stands Hymn 223Behold the Path that Mortals tread Hymn 27Behold the Son of God appears Hymn 314Behold the Son of God's Delight Hymn 191Behold with pleasing Extacy Hymn 121Beneath thy mighty Hand, O God Hymn 338Beset with Snares on every Hand Hymn 207Blest be the Lamb whose Blood was spilt Hymn 312Blest Jesus, bow thine Ear Hymn 301Blest Jesus, Source of Grace divine Hymn 221Blest Men who stretch their willing Hands Hymn 247Blest Saviour, to my Heart more dear Hymn 139Bridegroom of Souls, how rich thy Love Hymn 293Bright Source of intellectual Rays Hymn 110CCAptives of Israel, hear Hymn 105Come, our indulgent Saviour, come Hymn 245Come, thou celestial Spirit, come Hymn 285DDEscend, immortal Dove Hymn 259Do not I love thee, O my Lord Hymn 246EENquire, ye Pilgrims, for the Way Hymn 137Eternal and immortal King Hymn 321Eternal God, our humbled Souls Hymn 154Eternal God, our wondring Souls Hymn 1Eternal King, thy Robes are white Hymn 165Eternal Source of every Joy Hymn 43Eternal Source of Life and Thought Hymn 322Exalted Prince of Life we own Hymn 248FFAther divine, the Saviour cried Hymn 190Father divine, thy piercing Eye Hymn 177Father of Lights, we sing thy Name Hymn 176Father of Men, thy Care we bless Hymn 2Father of Mercies, in thy House Hymn 289Father of Mercies, send thy Grace Hymn 205Father of Peace, and GOD of Love Hymn 325Father of Spirits, from thy Hand Hymn 13Flow on my Tears in rising Streams Hymn 129Fountain of Comfort and of Love Hymn 271GGOD of Eternity, from thee Hymn 292God of my Life, thro' all its Days Hymn 71God of my Life, thy constant Care Hymn 134God of Salvation, we adore Hymn 40God of the Ocean, at whose Voice Hymn 117Go, saith the Lord, proclaim my Grace Hymn 219Grace! 'tis a charming Sound Hymn 286Great Father of each perfect Gift Hymn 251Great Father of Mankind Hymn 113Great Former of this various Frame Hymn 54Great God, did pious Abraham pray Hymn 3Great God of Heaven and Nature rise Hymn 368Great God of Hosts, attend our Prayer Hymn 84Great God, we sing that mighty Hand Hymn 257Great Leader of thine Israel's Host Hymn 306Great Lord of Angels, we adore Hymn 166Great Object of thine Israel's Hope Hymn 131Great Ruler of all Nature's Frame Hymn 92Great Sov'reign of the human Heart Hymn 256Great Source of Being and of Love Hymn 147Great Source of Life, our Souls confess Hymn 59Great Spirit of immortal Love Hymn 331Great Teacher of thy Church, we own Hymn 175HHAil everlasting Prince of Peace Hymn 282Hail everlasting Spring Hymn 170Hail gracious Saviour, all divine Hymn 238Hail Progeny divine Hymn 200Hail to Emanuel's ever-honour'd Name Hymn 299Hail to the Prince of Life and Peace Hymn 351Hark! for the great Creator speaks Hymn 114Hark! for 'tis God's own Son that calls Hymn 226Hark! for 'tis Wisdom's Voice Hymn 73Hark the glad Sound, the Saviour comes Hymn 203Hark! 'tis our heav'nly Leader's Voice Hymn 353Hear, gracious Sovereign from thy Throne Hymn 145Hearken, ye Children of your God Hymn 300Heav'n has confirm'd the great Decree Hymn 313He comes, the royal Conqueror comes Hymn 213He comes, thy God, O Israel, comes Hymn 156Henceforth let each believing Heart Hymn 241High let us swell our tuneful Notes Hymn 201House of our God, with chearful Anthems ring Hymn 67How free the Fountain flows Hymn 300How gentle God's Commands Hymn 340How glorious, Lord, art thou Hymn 77How gracious and how wise Hymn 143How keen the Tempter's Malice is Hymn 216How long shall Dreams of Creature Bliss Hymn 125How rich thy Bounty, King of Kings Hymn 275How rich thy Favours, God of Grace Hymn 341How swift the Torrent flows Hymn 164II Am thy God, Jehovah said Hymn 319Jehovah! 'tis a glorious Name Hymn 20Jesus, I love thy charming Name Hymn 335Jesus, I sing thy matchless Grace Hymn 290Jesus, mine Advocate above Hymn 345Jesus, my Lord, how rich thy Grace Hymn 188Jesus, our Souls delightful Choice Hymn 197Jesus the Lord, our Souls adore Hymn 311Jesus, we own thy saving Power Hymn 204Jesus, we own thy sov'reign Hand Hymn 234Immense eternal God Hymn 10Immortal God, on thee we call Hymn 307Indulgent God, with pitying Eye Hymn 61Indulgent Sov'reign of the Skies Hymn 120In glad Amazement, Lord, I stand Hymn 70In one harmonious chearful Song Hymn 232In Raptures let our Hearts ascend Hymn 244Interval of grateful Shade Hymn 363In thy Rebukes, all-gracious God Hymn 109In what Confusion Earth appears Hymn 212I own, my God, thy sov'reign Grace Hymn 240Israel, thy Tribute bring Hymn 357Is there a Sight in Earth or Heaven Hymn 224It is my Father's Voice Hymn 90It is the Lord of Glory calls Hymn 126LLEgions of Foes beset me round Hymn 31Let Heaven burst forth into a Song Hymn 103Let Jacob to his Maker-sing Hymn 102Let Zion's Watchmen all awake Hymn 324Lift up, ye Saints, your weeping Eyes Hymn 358Liften ye Hills, ye Mountains, hear Hymn 158Look back, my Soul, with grateful Love Hymn 58Look down, O Lord, with pitying Eye Hymn 146Lord, dost thou shew a Corner Stone Hymn 334Lord of the Sabbath, hear our Vows Hymn 310Lord of the Vineyard, we adore Hymn 237Lord, we adore thy wondrous Name Hymn 55Lord, we have broke thy holy Laws Hymn 157Lord, we have wander'd from thy Way Hymn 65Lord, when Iniquities abound Hymn 7Lord, when thine Israel we survey Hymn 83Lord, when thy Hand is lifted up Hymn 88Loud be thy Name ador'd Hymn 283Loud let the tuneful Trumpet sound Hymn 50Loud to the Prince of Heaven Hymn 41MMArk the soft-falling Snow Hymn 111Mine inward Joys suppress'd too long Hymn 330My God, and is thy Table spread Hymn 171My God, assist me, while I raise Hymn 266My God! how chearful is the Sound Hymn 297My God, the Cov'nant of thy Love Hymn 21My God, thy Service well demands Hymn 364My God, what silken Cords are thine Hymn 152My God, whose all-pervading Eye Hymn 45My gracious Lord, I own thy Right Hymn 294My Helper God, I bless his Name Hymn 19My Jesus, while in mortal Flesh Hymn 280My Lord, didst thou indure such Smart Hymn 276My Saviour, didst thou die for me Hymn 193My Saviour, I am thine Hymn 267My Saviour, let me hear thy Voice Hymn 179My Sins, alas! how foul the Stains Hymn 348My Soul, review the trembling Days Hymn 68My Soul, the awful Hour will come Hymn 39My Soul triumphant in the Lord Hymn 33My Soul, with all thy waken'd Powers Hymn 320My Soul, with Joy attend Hymn 231My various Pow'rs, awake Hymn 347My waken'd Soul, extend thy Wings Hymn 342NNOw be that Sacrifice survey'd Hymn 291Now let a true Ambition rise Hymn 178Now let my Soul with Transport rise Hymn 261Now let our chearful Eyes survey Hymn 8Now let our mourning Hearts revive Hymn 17Now let our Songs address the God of Peace Hymn 367Now let our Songs proclaim abroad Hymn 318Now let our Voices join Hymn 69Now let the feeble all be strong Hymn 269Now let the Gates of Zion sing Hymn 182Now let the list'ning World around Hymn 74Now let the Sons of Belial hear Hymn 80Now to that sov'reign Grace Hymn 326OO God of Jacob, by whose Hand Hymn 4O happy Christian, who can boast Hymn 349O happy Day, that fix'd my Choice Hymn 23O injur'd Majesty of Heaven Hymn 142O Israel, blest beyond Compare Hymn 16O Israel, thou art blest Hymn 78O praise ye the Lord, prepare a new Song Hymn 366O righteous God, thou Judge supreme Hymn 140O Thou that hast Redemption wrought Hymn 249Our Banner is th' eternal God Hymn 6Our Eyes Salvation see Hymn 202Our God ascends his lofty Throne Hymn 82Our heav'nly Father calls Hymn 346Our Souls with pleasing Wonder view Hymn 34Our Souls with Rev'rence, Lord, bow down Hymn 339O where is sov'reign Mercy gone Hymn 116O ye immortal Throng Hymn 304O Zion, tune thy Voice Hymn 118PPArent of universal Good Hymn 47Peace, all ye Sorrows of the Heart Hymn 235Peace, 'tis the Lord Jehovah's Hand Hymn 42Perfection! 'tis an empty Name Hymn 63Perpetual Source of Light and Grace Hymn 151Praise to our Shepherd's gracious Name Hymn 229Praise to the Lord of boundless Might Hymn 274Praise to the Lord on high Hymn 273Praise to the Lord whose mighty Hand Hymn 272Praise to the radiant Source of Bliss Hymn 101Praise to the Sov'reign of the Sky Hymn 162Praise to thy Name, eternal God Hymn 344RRAise, thoughtless Sinner, raise thine Eye Hymn 148Remark, my Soul, the narrow Bounds Hymn 52Repent, the Voice celestial cries Hymn 254Return, my roving Heart, return Hymn 29Return, my Soul, and seek thy Rest Hymn 57SSAlvation doth to God belong Hymn 369Salvation! O melodious Sound Hymn 36Satan the dire Invader came Hymn 308Saviour divine, we know thy Name Hymn 132Saviour of Men and Lord of Love Hymn 184Searcher of Hearts, before thy Face Hymn 250See how the Lord of Mercy spreads Hymn 185See Israel's gentle Shepherd stand Hymn 198See the Destruction is begun Hymn 94See the fair Structure Wisdom rears Hymn 76See the old Dragon from his Throne Hymn 356Shepherd of Israel, bend thine Ear Hymn 370Shepherd of Israel, thou dost keep Hymn 123Shine forth, eternal Source of Light Hymn 150Shine on our Souls, eternal God Hymn 53Shout! for the Battlements are fall'n Hymn 278Sing to the Lord above Hymn 167Sing to the Lord a new melodious Song Hymn 220Sing to the Lord, who loud proclaims Hymn 30Sing, ye redeemed of the Lord Hymn 96So firm the Saints Foundations stand Hymn 161Sov'reign of all the Worlds on high Hymn 281Sov'reign of Heaven, thine Empire spreads Hymn 180Sov'reign of Life, before thine Eye Hymn 25Sov'reign of Life, I own thy Hand Hymn 60Sov'reign of Nature, all is thine Hymn 14Spring up, my Soul, with ardent Flight Hymn 268Stupendous Grace! And can it be Hymn 287Supreme in Mercy, who shall dare Hymn 160Supreme of Beings, with Delight Hymn 355TTHe Cov'nant of a Saviour's Love Hymn 236The Creatures, Lord, confess thy Hand Hymn 5The darken'd Sky how thick it lours Hymn 66The Day approacheth, O my Soul Hymn 317The Deluge at th' Almighty's Call Hymn 336The everliving God Hymn 89The glorious Lord, his Israel's Hope Hymn 95The great Jehovah! who shall dare Hymn 26The King of Heaven his Table spreads Hymn 211The Lord from his exalted Throne Hymn 28The Lord! how kind are all his Ways Hymn 149The Lord! how rich his Comforts are Hymn 277The Lord Jehovah calls Hymn 309The Lord into his Vineyard comes Hymn 174The Lord of Glory reigns supremely great Hymn 44The Lord of Life exalted stands Hymn 225The Lord on mortal Worms looks down Hymn 172The Lord our Lord! how rich his Grace Hymn 106The Lord with Pleasure views his Saints Hymn 37The Promises I sing Hymn 316The righteous Lord supremely great Hymn 128These mortal Joys! how soon they fade Hymn 209The Sepulchres how thick they stand Hymn 243The swift-declining Day Hymn 130Th' eternal God, his Name how great Hymn 24The Vineyard of the Lord how fair Hymn 81Thou, Lord, thro' every changing Scene Hymn 51Thou, mighty Lord, art God alone Hymn 253Thrice happy Souls, who born from Heaven Hymn 79Thrice happy State, where Saints shall live Hymn 215Thus hath the Son of Jesse said Hymn 365Thus saith Jehovah from his Seat Hymn 91Thy Flock, with what a tender Care Hymn 230Thy Judgments cry aloud Hymn 115Thy piercing Eye, O God, surveys Hymn 138Thy Presence, everlasting God Hymn 279'Tis mine, the Cov'nant of his Grace Hymn 22To all his Flock what wondrous Love Hymn 239To-morrow, Lord, is thine Hymn 329To thee, great Architect on high Hymn 305To thee, my God, my Days are known Hymn 38To thee, O God, we Homage pay Hymn 173Transporting Tidings, which we hear Hymn 302Triumphant, Lord, thy Goodness reigns Hymn 35Triumphant Zion, lift thy Head Hymn 107VVIler than Dust, O Lord, are we Hymn 135Ungrateful Sinners, whence this Scorn Hymn 258Unite, my roving Thoughts, unite Hymn 48WWAit on the Lord, ye Heirs of Hope Hymn 93Weary, and weak, and faint Hymn 87We bless th' eternal Source of Light Hymn 352We praise the Lord for heavenly Bread Hymn 222We sing the deep mysterious Plan Hymn 284What Bosom mov'd with pious Zeal Hymn 9What doleful Accents do I hear Hymn 192What haughty Scorner, saith the Lord Hymn 168What Myst'ries, Lord, in thee combine Hymn 350What venerable Sight appears Hymn 214When at this Distance, Lord, we trace Hymn 183While on the Verge of Life I stand Hymn 295Whose Words against the Lord are stout Hymn 136Why flow these Torrents of Distress Hymn 196Why should our mourning Souls delight Hymn 260Why will ye lavish out your Years Hymn 206Wide o'er all Worlds the Saviour reigns Hymn 195With Extaey of Joy Hymn 333With flowing Eyes, and bleeding Hearts Hymn 270With humble Pleasure, Lord, we trace Hymn 11With Pity, Lord, thy Servant view Hymn 62With rev'rend Awe, tremendous Lord Hymn 133With Transport, Lord, our Souls proclaim Hymn 323With what Delight I raise mine Eyes Hymn 85YYE Armies of the living God Hymn 265Ye golden Lamps of Heaven, farewell Hymn 119Ye Hearts with youthful Vigour warm Hymn 75Ye Heav'ns, with Sounds of Triumph ring Hymn 303Ye humble Souls, rejoice Hymn 72Ye humble Souls, that seek the Lord Hymn 194Ye little Flock, whom Jesus feeds Hymn 208Ye mourning Saints, whose streaming Tears Hymn 112Ye Pris'ners, who in Bondage lie Hymn 169Yes, Britain seem'd to Ruin doom'd Hymn 155Ye Servants of the Lord Hymn 210Ye Sinners, bend your stubborn Necks Hymn 328Ye Sinners, on Backsliding bent Hymn 153Yes, it is sweet to taste his Grace Hymn 332Ye Sons of Men, with Joy record Hymn 56Yes, the Redeemer rose Hymn 218Yes, 'tis the Voice of Love divine Hymn 163Ye Subjects of the Lord, proclaim Hymn 108Ye weak Inhabitants of Clay Hymn 97HYMNS AND SPIRITUAL SONGS, From PASSAGES in the OLD TESTAMENT.I. Enoch's Piety and Translation, Genesis V. 24. Hebrews XI. 5.1ETERNAL GOD, our wond'ring SoulsAdmire thy matchless Grace;That thou wilt walk, that thou wilt dwell,With Adam's worthless Race.2O lead me to that happy Path,Where I my GOD may meet;Tho' Hosts of Foes begird it round,Tho' Briars wound my Feet.3Chear'd with thy Converse I can traceThe Desart with Delight:Thro' all the Gloom one Smile of thineCan dissipate the Night.4Nor shall I thro' eternal DaysA restless Pilgrim roam:Thy Hand, that now directs my Course,Shall soon convey me home.5I ask not Enoch's rapt'rous FlightTo Realms of heav'nly Day:Nor seek Elijah's fiery Steeds,To bear this Flesh away.6Joyful my Spirit will consentTo drop its mortal Load,And hail salute or welcome. the sharpest Pangs of Death,That break its Way to GOD.II. GOD'S gracious Approbation of a religious Care of our Families, Genesis xviii. 19.1FATHER of Men, thy Care we bless,Which crowns our Families with Peace:From thee they sprung, and by thy HandTheir Root, and Branches are sustain'd.2To GOD, most worthy to be prais'd,Be our domestick Altars rais'd;Who, Lord of Heaven, scorns not to dwellWith Saints in their obscurest Cell.3To thee may each united HouseMorning, and Night, present its Vows:
Our Servants there, and rising RaceBe taught thy Precepts, and thy Grace.4O may each future Age proclaimThe Honours of thy glorious Name;While pleas'd, and thankful, we removeTo join the Family above.III. ABRAHAM'S Intercession for SODOM. Genesis xviii. 32.For a Fast Day.1GREAT GOD! did pious Abram prayFor Sodom's vile abandon'd Race?And shall not all our Souls be rous'dFor Britain to implore thy Grace?2Base as we are, does not thine EyeIts chosen Thousands here survey;Whose Souls, deep humbled, mourn the [Crouds,Who walk in Sin's destructive Way?3O Judge supreme, let not thy SwordThe righteous with the wicked smite:Nor bury in promiscuous HeapsRebels, and Saints thy chief Delight.4For these thy Children spare the Land;Avert the Thunders big with Death;Nor let the Seeds of latent hidden, secret. FireBe kindled by thy flaming Breath.5On! be not angry, mighty GOD,While Dust and Ashes seek thy Face!But gently bending from thy Throne,Renew, and still increase the Grace.6JESUS the Intercessor hear,And for his Sake thy Grace impart,Which, while it stops the fiery Stream,Dissolves the most obdurate Heart.7Sodom shall change to Zion then,And heavenly Dews be scatter'd round,That Plants of Paradise may spring,Where baleful destructive. Poysons curs'd the Ground.IV. JACOB'S Vow. Genesis xxviii. 20.-22.1O GOD of Jacob, by whose HandThine Israel still is fed,Who thro' this weary PilgrimageHast all our Fathers led:2To thee our humble Vows we raise,To thee address our Prayer,And in thy kind and faithful BreastDeposite all our Care.3If thou thro' each perplexing PathWilt be our constant Guide;If thou wilt daily Bread supply,And Raiment wilt provide;4If thou wilt spread thy Shield around,Till these our Wand'rings cease,And at our Father's lov'd AbodeOur Souls arrive in Peace;5To thee, as to our Covenant-GOD,We'll our whole selves resign;And count that not our Tenth alone,But all we have is thine.V. The Hand of the LORD upon the Cattle. Exodus ix. 3.1THE Creatures, LORD, confess thy Hand,Thro' Earth and Sky, thro' Sea & Land;And all their meanest Orders shareTheir Maker's Pity, and his Care.2O look from thine exalted Throne,And hear our panting Cattle moan;Prone Stretched out on the Ground. o'er th' untasted Food they lye,Groan out their Agonies, and dye.3What have these harmless Creatures doneTo draw this sore Chastisement down?'Tis human Guilt for Vengeance calls,And heavy on the Herds it falls.4From them to us the Stroke might pass,And mow down Thousands of our Race:Till Desolation reign'd around,Our Cities void, untill'd our Ground.5Prevent the Ruin by thy Grace,And melt our Hearts to seek thy Face:Blest Fruit of thy correcting RodTo lose our Beasts, and find our GOD.VI. ISRAEL and AMALEK. Exodus xvii. 11. For a Fast-Day.1OUR Banner is th' Eternal GOD,Nor will we yield to Fear;Amidst ten thousand fierce Assaults,His mighty Aid is near.2To him the Hands of Faith we stretch,And plead experienc'd Grace;To him the Voice of Prayer we raise,Nor will he hide his Face.3No more, proud Amalek, thy Boast,"GOD'S Arm is feeble grown".His Sword shall lop off every Hand,That dares insult his Throne.4Awake, tremendous Judge, awake,Our Nation's Cause to plead;Nor let thine Israel's Foes, and thineBy Wickedness succeed.5Our fainting Hands, how soon they droop!But thou the weak canst raise;And in the Mount of Prayer canst leaveAn Altar to thy Praise.VII. Against following a Multitude to do Evil. Exodus XXIII. 2.1LORD, when Iniquities abound,And growing Crimes appear;We view the Deluge rising roundWith Sorrow, and with Fear.2Yet when its Waves most fiercely beat,And spread Destruction wide,Thy Spirit can a Standard raiseTo stem restrain. the roaring Tide.3May thy triumphant Arm awakeThy sacred Cause to plead;
And let the Multitude confess,That thou art GOD indeed.4Their Hearts shall in a Moment turn,Like Water by thy Hand;One Word shall bow their stubborn NecksTo own thy high command.5Our feeble Souls at least support,And there thy Power display;Then Multitudes shall strive in vainTo draw us from thy Way.VIII. CHRIST'S Intercession typified by AARON'S Breastplate. Exodus xxviii. 29.1NOW let our chearful Eyes surveyOur great High-Priest above,And celebrate his constant Care,And sympathetic Love.2Tho' rais'd to a superior Throne,Where Angels bow around,And high o'er all the shining TrainWith matchless Honours crown'd;3The Names of all his Saints he bearsDeep graven on his Heart;Nor shall the meanest Christian say,That he hath lost his Part.4Those Characters shall fair abide,Our everlasting Trust,When Gems, and Monuments, and CrownsAre moulder'd down to Dust.5So, Gracious Saviour, on my Breast,May thy dear Name be worn,A sacred Ornament and Guard,To endless Ages borne.IX. Who is on the Lord's Side? Exodus xxxii. 26.1WHAT Bosom mov'd with pious ZealDoes for its GOD'S Dishonour feel?What Heart with generous Ardor glowsTo plead his Cause against his Foes?2Great GOD, what Bosom can be cold?What Coward must not here grow bold?While Honour, Interest, Truth, and LoveConcur our inmost Souls to move?3Around thy Standard, Lord, we press,Thine injur'd Honour to redress,And with determin'd Voice demandThe Signal of thy conqu'ring Hand.4Thou shalt these sacred Weapons bless,And lead thro' War to endless Peace;Not Death itself our Souls shall dread,For thine own Arm shall raise the Dead.X. GOD'S Presence desireable. Exodus xxxiii. 15.1IMMENSE, eternal GOD!How marvellous thy Name!Thy Presence all abroadPervades penetrates thro' or fills. all Nature's Frame;
Heav'n, Earth, and Air,And the dark Cell,Where Devils dwellIn long Despair.2Yet thou hast chosen WaysTo make thy Presence known,To Fav'rites of thy Grace,To upright Souls alone:This Glory, LORD,My Soul would see,This Grace to me,My GOD, afford.3If thou thy Lustre vailThe Charms of Nature fade;All wither'd, weak, and pale,They bow their languid Head:My Father, shine;For thou canst giveThe Dead to liveBy Beams divine.4Ev'n Eden's blissful LandsWould in thine Absence mourn;But thou wild Afric'sAFRICA, a Part of the Earth remarkable for sandy barren Desarts. SandsTo Paradise canst turn.If GOD be thereThe Gloom is bright;But Noon is Night,Till thou appear.5Come, for my Spirit glowsWith infinite Desire!Strong Love impatient grows,And sets my Heart on Fire.My Father, come;That Presence giveOn which I live;Or call me home.XI. MOSES'S View of the divine Glory. Exod. xxxiii. 18.1WITH humble Pleasure, Lord, we traceThe ancient Records of thy Grace;And our own Consolation drawFrom what thy Servant Moses saw.2May we behold thy Glory shine,With gentle Beams of Love divine;And hear thy secret Voice proclaimThe various Wonders of thy Name.3If feeble Nature faint t' endureA Voice so sweet, a Ray so pure;Its Dissolution would delight,While Death would wear a Form so bright.4Death shall unvail that World above,Where the dear Children of thy Love,Attemper'd fitted and enabled to bear. all to heavenly Day,Bear, and reflect th' immediate Ray.XII. The Proclamation of GOD'S Name to Moses, or divine Mercy and Justice. Exod. xxxiv. 6,-8.1ATTEND, my Soul, the Voice divine,And mark what beaming Glories shineAround thy condescending GOD!To us, to us, he still proclaimsHis awful, his endearing Names:Attend, and sound them all abroad.2"JEHOVAH I, the sov'reign Lord,"The mighty GOD, by Heav'n ador'd,"Down to the Earth my Footsteps bend:"My Heart the tend'rest Pity knows,"Goodness full-streaming overflows,"And Grace and Truth shall never End.3"My Patience long can Crimes endure;"My pard'ning Love is ever sure,"When penitential Sorrow mourns;"To Millions thro' unnumber'd Years,"New Hope and new Delight it bears;"Yet Wrath against the Sinner burns."4Make Haste, my Soul, the Vision meet,All prostrate at thy Sov'reign's Feet,And drink the tuneful Accents in;Speak on, my Lord; repeat the Voice;Diffuse these Heart-expanding Joys,Till Heav'n compleat the rapt'rous Scene.XIII. The GOD of Spirits sought to supply Vacancies in the Congregations of his People Numbers xxvii. 15,-17.1FATHER of Spirits, from thy HandOur Souls immortal came;And still thine Energy Power. divineSupports th' ethereal Heavenly. Flame.2By thee our Spirits all are known;And each remotest ThoughtLies wide expanded to his Eye,By whom their Powers were wrought.3To thee, when mortal Comforts fail,Thy Flock deserted flies;And, on th' eternal Shepherds Care,Our chearful Hope relies.4When o'er thy faithful Servants Dust,Thy dear Assemblies mourn,In speedy Tokens of thy Grace,O Israel's GOD, return.5The Powers of Nature all are thine,And thine the Aids of Grace;Thine Arm has borne thy Churches upThro' every rising Race.6Exert thy sacred Influence here,And here thy Suppliants bless,And change, to Strains of chearful Praise,Their Accents of Distress.7With faithful Heart, with skilful Hand,May this thy Flock be fed;And with a steady growing PaceTo Zion's Mountain led.XIV. The Lord's People his Portion. Deuteron. xxxii. 9.1SOV'REIGN of Nature, all is thine,The Air, the Earth, the Sea:By thee the Orbs celestial The heavenly Bodies. shine,And Cherubs live by thee.2Rich in thine own Essential Store,Thou call'st forth Worlds at Will:Ten thousand, and ten thousand moreWould hear thy Summons still.3What Treasure wilt thou then confess?And thine own Portion call?What by peculiar Right possess,Imperial Lord of all?4Thine Israel thou wilt stoop to claim,Wilt mark them out for thine:Ten thousand Praises to thy NameFor Goodness so divine!5That I am thine, my Soul would boast,And boast its Claim to thee;Nor shall GOD'S Property be lostNor GOD be torn from me.XV. The Eternal GOD his People's Refuge, and Support. Deut. xxxiii. 27.1BEHOLD the great eternal GOD,Spreads everlasting Arms abroad,And calls our Souls to shelter there.Wonders of mingled Power and GraceTo all his Israel he displays,Guarded from Danger, and from Fear.2Thither my feeble Soul shall flyWhen Terrors press, and Death is nigh,And there will I delight to dwell:On that high Tower I rear my HeadSerene, nor knows my Heart to dread,Amidst surrounding Hosts of Hell.3The Shadow of th' Almighty's WingsComposure unmolested brings,While threat'ning Horrors round me croud;In vain the Storms of rattling HailThe Walls of this Retreat assail,And the wild Tempest roars aloud.4In louder Strains my fearless TongueShall warble its victorious Song,My Father's Graces to proclaim;He bears his Infant Off-spring onTo Glory radiant as his Throne,And Joys eternal as his Name.XVI. The Happiness of GOD'S Israel. Deut, xxxiii. 29.1O Israel, blest beyond Compare!Unrival'd all thy Glories are:Jehovah deigns condescends. to fill thy Throne,And calls thine Interest all his own.2He is thy Saviour; He thy Lord;His Shield is thine; and thine his Sword:Review in Extacy of ThoughtThe grand Redemption he has wrought.3From Satan's Yoke he sets thee free,Opens thy Passage thro' the Sea;He thro' the Desart is thy Guide,And Heav'n, for Canaan, will provide.4Not Jacob's Sons of old could boastSuch Favours to their chosen Host;Their Glories, which thro' Ages shine,Are but dim Shades, and Types of thine.5Celestial Spirit, teach our TongueSublimer Strains than Moses sung,Proportion'd to the sweeter NameOf GOD the SAVIOUR, and the LAMB.XVII. Support in the gracious Presence of GOD under the Loss of Ministers, and other useful Friends. Joshua i. 2, 4, 5.1NOW let our mourning Hearts revive,And all our Tears be dry.Why should those Eyes be drown'd in Grief,Which view a Saviour nigh?2What tho' the Arm of conqu'ring DeathDoes GOD'S own House invade?What tho' the Prophet, and the PriestBe number'd with the Dead?3Tho' earthly Shepherds dwell in Dust,The Aged, and the Young,The watchful Eye in Darkness clos'd,And mute th' instructive Tongue;4Th' eternal Shepherd still survivesNew Comfort to impart;His Eye still guides us, and his VoiceStill animates our Heart.5"Lo, I am with you, saith the Lord,"My Church shall safe abide;"For I will ne'er forsake my own,"Whose Souls in me confide."6Thro' every Scene of Life, and Death,This Promise is our Trust;And this shall be our Children's Song,When we are cold in Dust.XVIII. GOD insensibly withdrawn. Judges xvi. 20.1A Present GOD is all our Strength,And all our Joy and Hope;When he withdraws, our Comforts dye,And every Grace must droop.2But flattering Trifles charm our HeartsTo court their false Embrace,Till justly this neglected FriendAverts his angry Face.3He leaves us, and we miss him not;But go presumptuous on,Till baffled, wounded, and enslav'd,We learn, that GOD is gone.4And what, my Soul, can then remainOne Ray of Light to give?Sever'd from him, their better Life,How can his Children live?5Hence all ye painted Forms of Joy,And leave my Heart to mourn!I would devote these Eyes to Tears,Till chear'd by his Return.6Look back, my Lord, and own the place,Where once thy Temple stood;For lo, its Ruins bear the markOf rich atoning Blood.XIX. EBENEZER, or GOD'S helping Hand review'd and acknowledged. 1 Sam. vii. 12.For New-Years Day.1MY helper GOD! I bless his Name:The same his Power, his Grace the same.The Tokens of his friendly CareOpen, and crown, and close the Year.2I 'midst ten thousand Dangers stand,Supported by his guardian Hand;And see, when I survey my Ways,Ten thousand Monuments of Praise.3Thus far his Arm has led me on;Thus far I make his Mercy known;And, while I tread this desart Land,New Mercies shall new Songs demand.4My greateful Soul, on Jerdan's Shore,Shall raise one sacred Pillar more:Then bear, in his bright Courts above,Inscriptions of immortal Love.XX. The Saint encouraging himself in the LORD his GOD. 1 Sam. xxx. 6.1JEHOVAH, 'tis a glorious Name:Still pregnant with Delight;It scatters round a chearful Beam,To gild the darkest Night.2What tho' our mortal Comforts fade,And drop like with'ring Flowers?Nor Time nor Death can break that Band,Which makes Jehovah our's.3My Cares, I give you to the Wind,And shake you off like Dust;Well may I trust my All with him,With whom my Soul I trust.XXI. Support in GOD'S Covenant under domestick Troubles. 2 Sam. xxiii. 5.1MY GOD, the Cov'nant of thy LoveAbides for ever sure,And in its matchless Grace I feelMy Happiness secure.2What tho' my House be not with theeAs Nature could desire?To nobler Joys, than Nature gives,Thy Servants all aspire.3Since thou, the everlasting GOD,My Father art become;Jesus my Guardian, and my Friend,And Heav'n my final Home;4I welcome all thy sov'reign Will;For all that Will is Love:
And, when I know not what thou dost,I wait the Light above.5Thy Cov'nant in the darkest GloomShall heav'nly Rays impart,Which, when my Eye-lids close in Death,Shall warm my chilling Heart.XXII. Support in GOD'S Covenant in the near Views of Death. 2 Sam. xxiii. 1. and 5. compared.1'TIS Mine, the Cov'nant of his Grace;And every Promise mine!All sprung from everlasting Love,And seal'd by Blood divine.2On my unworthy favour'd HeadIts Blessings all unite;Blessings more numerous than the Stars,More lasting, and more bright.3Death, thou mayst tear this Rag of Flesh,And sink my fainting Head,And lay my Ruins in the Grave,Among my Kindred Dead:4But Death and Hell in vain shall striveTo break that sacred Rest,Which GOD's expiring Children feel,While leaning on his Breast.5Th' enlarged Soul thou canst not reach,Nor rend from Christ away;Tho' o'er my mould'ring Dust thou boast,The Triumphs of a Day.6The Night is past, my Morning dawns;My Cov'nant GOD descends,And wakes that Dust to join my SoulIn Bliss that never ends.7That Cov'nant the last Accent claimsOf this poor falt'ring Tongue;And that shall the first Notes employOf my celestial Song.XXIII. Rejoicing in our Covenant Engagements to GOD. 1 Chron. xv. 15.1O Happy Day, that fix'd my ChoiceOn thee, my Saviour, and my GOD!Well may this glowing Heart rejoice,And tell its Raptures all abroad.2O happy Bond, that seals my VowsTo him who merits all my Love!Let chearful Anthems Hymns of Praise. fill his House,While to that sacred Shrine Altar or Place of Worship. I move.3'Tis done; the great Transaction's done:I am my Lord's, and he is mine:He drew me, and I follow'd on,Charm'd to confess the Voice divine.4Now rest my long divided Heart,Fix'd on this blissful Centre, rest;With Ashes who would grudge to partWhen call'd on Angels Bread to feast?5High Heav'n, that heard the solemn Vow,That Vow renew'd shall daily hear;
Till in Life's latest Hour I bow,And bless in Death a Bond so dear.XXIV. GOD'S stirring up the Spirit of CYRUS to redeem ISRAEL. Ezra i. 1. compared with Isaiah xlv. 1.-4.1TH' eternal GOD! his Name how great!How deep his Counsels! how compleat!The Hearts of Kings his Power can sway;His Word unconscious without intending it. Isa. x. 7. they obey.2Summon'd of old in distant DaysTo serve his Schemes, and shew his Praise,Cyrus, illustrious Prince, appears,His People frees, his Temple rears.3Thro' Legions arm'd he breaks his Way,And tramples Gen'rals down like Clay;The Bars of Steel he cuts in twain,And brazen Gates oppose in vain.4But to Jehovah's Accents mildThe Hero pliant as a Child,Lays the new Cares of Empire by,Till Zion rise, and shine on high.5Thus, mighty GOD, shall every Heart,(If thou thine Influence there exert)Throw its own fondest Schemes aside,And follow where thy Hand shall guide.6The foremost Sons of Fame shall boastTo raise thy Temples from their Dust;Princes shall shout thy Name aloud,And new-born Priests thine Altars croud.XXV. A Glance from GOD bringing us down to the Solitude of the Grave. Job vii. 8.1SOV'REIGN of Life, before thine Eye,Lo! mortal Men by thousands dye!One Glance from thee at once brings downThe proudest Brow, that wears a Crown.2Banish'd at once from human SightTo the dark Grave's unchanging Night,Imprison'd in that dusty Bed,We hide our solitary Head.3The friendly Band Company. no more shall greet,Accents familiar once, and sweet:No more the well-known Features trace,No more renew the fond Embrace.4Yet if my Father's faithful HandConduct me thro' this gloomy Land,My Soul with Pleasure shall obey,And follow, where he leads the Way.5He nobler Friends, than here I leave,In brighter surer Worlds can give;Or by the Beamings of his EyeA lost Creation well supply.XXVI. The Impossibility of Prospering while we harden ourselves against GOD. Job ix. 4.1THE Great Jehovah! who shall dareWith him to tempt unequal War?What Heart of Steel shall dare t'opposeAnd league among his hard'ned Foes?2At his Command the Lightnings dart,And swift transfix pierce thro'. the rebel Heart:Earth trembles at his Look, and cleaves,And Legions sink in living Graves.3Where are the haughty Monarchs now,Who scorn'd his Word with lowring Brow?Where are the Trophies of their Reigns?Or where their Ruin's last Remains?4See Pharaoh sinking in the Tide!See Babel's Tyrant, mad with Pride,Graze with the Beasts! hear Herod roar,While Worms his Deity devour!5See from the Turrets of the SkiesTall Cherubs sink, no more to rise;And trace their Rank on Thrones of LightBy heavier Chains, and darker Night.6Great GOD! and shall this Soul of minePresume to challenge Wrath divine?Trembling I seek thy Mercy-Seat,And lay my Weapons at thy Feet.XXVII. The great Journey. Job xvi. 22.1BEHOLD the Path that Mortals treadDown to the Regions of the dead!Nor will the fleeting Moments stay,Nor can we measure back our Way.2Our Kindred and our Friends are gone;Know, O my Soul, this Doom thine own;Feeble as theirs my mortal Frame,The same my Way, my House the same.3From vital Air, from chearful Light,To the cold Grave's perpetual Night,From Scenes of Duty, Means of Grace,Must I to GOD'S Tribunal pass.4Important Journey! awful View!How great the Change! the Scenes how newThe golden Gates of Heav'n display'd,Or Hell's fierce Flames, and gloomy Shade,5Awake, my Soul; thy Way prepare,And lose in this each mortal Care;With steady Feet that Path be trod,Which thro' the Grave conducts to GOD.6Jesus, to thee my ALL I trust:And if thou call me down to DustI know thy Voice, I bless thy Hand,And dye in Smiles at thy Command.7What was my Terror, is my Joy;These Views my brightest Hopes employTo go, e'er many Years are o'er,Secure I shall return no more.XXVIII. The Penitent brought back from  Pit. Job xxxiii. 27. 28.1THE LORD from his exalted Throne,In Majesty array'd,Looks with a melting Pity downOn all, that seek his Aid.2When, touch'd with penitent Remorse,Our Follies past we mourn,With what a Tenderness of LoveHe meets our first Return!3From Heav'n he sent his only SonTo ransom us with Blood,To snatch us from the burning Pit,When on it's Brink we stood.4From Death and Hell he leads us upBy a delightful Way;And the bright Beams of endless LifeDoes round our Path display.5Great GOD, we wonder, and adore;And, to exalt such Grace,We long to learn the Songs of Heav'nE'er yet we reach the Place.XXIX. Communing with our Hearts. Psal. iv. 4.1RETURN, my roving Heart, return,And chase these shadowy Forms no more;Seek out some Solitude to mourn,And thy forsaken GOD implore.2Wisdom and Pleasure dwell at home;Retir'd, and silent seek them there:True Conquest is ourselves t' o'ercome,True Strength to break the Tempter's Snare.3And thou, my GOD, whose piercing EyeDistinct surveys each deep Recess,In these abstracted Hours draw nigh,And with thy Presence fill the Place.4Thro' all the Mazes Windings, Perplexities. of my HeartMy Search let heav'nly Wisdom guide,
And still it's radiant Beams impart,Till all be search'd, and purified.5Then with the Visits of thy LoveVouchsafe my inmost Soul to chear;Till ev'ry Grace shall join to proveThat GOD hath fix'd his Dwelling there.XXX. GOD'S Name the Encouragement of our Faith. Psalm ix. 10.1SING to the LORD, who loud proclaimsHis various, and his saving Names;O may they not be heard alone,But by our sure Experience known!2Let great Jehovah be ador'd,Th' Eternal, All-sufficient LORD,He thro' the World most high confess'd,By whom 'twas form'd, and is possess'd.3Awake our noblest Pow'rs to blessThe GOD of Abram, GOD of Peace;Now by a dearer Title known,Father and GOD of CHRIST his Son.4Thro' ev'ry Age his gracious EarIs open to his Servants Pray'r,Nor can one humble Soul complain,That it has sought it's GOD in vain.5What unbelieving Heart shall dareIn Whispers to suggest a Fear?While still he owns his ancient Name,The same his Pow'r, his Love the same.6To thee our Souls in Faith arise,To thee we lift expecting Eyes;And boldly thro' the Desart tread,For GOD will guard, where GOD shall lead.XXXI. Triumph in GOD'S Protection. Psalm xviii. 2.1LEGIONS of Foes beset me round,While marching o'er this dang'rous Ground;Yet in Jehovah's Aid I trust,And in his Pow'r superior boast.2My Buckler he: His Shield is spreadTo cover this defenceless Head:Now let the fiercest Foes assail,Their Darts, I count, as rattling Hail.3He is my Rock, and he my Tow'r;The Base Foundation. how firm! the Walls how sure!The Battlements how high they rise!And hide their Summits Top. in the Skies.4Deliv'rances to GOD belong;He is my Strength, and he my Song;The Horn of my Salvation he,And all my Foes dispers'd shall flee.5Thro' the long March my Lips shall singMy great Protector, and my King,Till Zion's Mount my Feet ascend,And all my painful Warfare end.6Rais'd on the shining Turrets thereThro' all the Prospect wide, and fair,
A Land of Peace his Hosts survey,And bless the Grace, that led the Way.XXXII. Support in Death. Psalm xxiii. 4.1BEHOLD the gloomy Vale,Which thou, my Soul, must tread,Beset with Terrors fierce and pale,That leads thee to the Dead.2Ye pleasing Scenes, AdieuFarewel.,Which I so long have known:My Friends, a long Farewel to you,For I must pass alone.3And thou, beloved Clay,Long Partner of my Cares,In this rough Path art torn awayWith Agony and Tears.4But see a Ray of Light,With Splendors all divine,Breaks thro' these doleful Realms of Night,And makes it's Horrors shine.5Where Death and Darkness reigns,Jehovah is my Stay:His Rod my trembling Feet sustains,His Staff defends my Way.6Dear Shepherd, lead me on;My Soul disdains to fear;Death's gloomy Phantoms all are flown,Now Life's great LORD is near.XXXIII. The Good Man's Prospect for Time and Eternity. Psalm xxiii. 6.1MY Soul triumphant in the LORDShall tell its Joys abroad;And march with holy Vigour on,Supported by it's GOD.2Thro' all the winding Maze Wilderness. of Life,His Hand hath been my Guide,And in that long experienc'd CareMy Heart shall still confide.3His Grace thro' all the Desart flowsAn unexhausted Stream:That Grace on Zion's sacred MountShall be my endless Theme Subject..4Beyond the choicest Joys of EarthThese distant Courts I love;But O! I burn with strong DesireTo view thy House above.5Mingled with all the shining BandMy Soul would there adore;A Pillar in thy Temple fix'd,To be remov'd no more.XXXIV. The Goodness which GOD has wrought, and laid up for his People. Psal. xxxi. 19.1OUR Souls with pleasing Wonder viewThe Bounties of thy Grace;How much bestow'd; How much reserv'dFor them that seek thy Face!2Thy lib'ral Hand with worldly BlissOft makes their Cup run o'er;And in the Cov'nant of thy LoveThey find diviner Store.3Here Mercy hides their num'rous Sins;Here Grace their Souls renews;Here thine own reconciled FaceDoth heav'nly Beams diffuse.4But O! what Treasures yet unknownAre lodg'd in Worlds to come?If these th' Enjoyments of the Way,How happy is their Home?5And what shall mortal Worms reply?Or how such Goodness own?But 'tis our Joy that, LORD, to theeThy Servants Hearts are known.6Thine Eyes shall read those grateful Thoughts,No Language can express:Yet when our liv'liest Thanks we pay,Our Debts do most increase.7Since Time's too short, All-gracious GOD,To utter half thy Praise,Loud to the Honour of thy NameEternal Hymns we'll raise.XXXV. Relishing the divine Goodness. Psalm xxxiv. 8, 9.1TRIUMPHANT, LORD, thy GoodnessThro' all the wide celestial Plains; [reignsAnd it's full Streams redundant flowDown to th' Abodes of Men below.2Thro' Nature's Works it's Glories shine:The Cares of Providence are thine:And Grace erects our ruin'd FrameA fairer Temple to thy Name.3O give to ev'ry human HeartTo taste, and feel how good thou art!With grateful Love, and rev'rend Fear,To know, how blest thy Children are.4Let Nature burst into a Song:Ye echoing Hills, the Notes prolong:Earth, Seas, and Stars your Anthems raise,All vocal sounding, as if endowed with Speech. with your Maker's Praise.5Ye Saints, with Joy the Theme persue;Its sweetest Notes belong to you;Chose by this condescending KingFor ever round his Throne to sing.XXXVI. GOD'S saying to the Soul, that he is its Salvation. Psalm xxxv. 3.1SALVATION! O melodious SoundTo wretched dying Men!Salvation, that from GOD proceeds,And leads to GOD again.2Rescu'd from Hell's eternal Gloom,From Fiends evil Spirits. and Fires, and Chains:Rais'd to a Paradise of Bliss,Where Love and Glory reigns.3But O! may a degen'rate Soul,Sinful and weak as mine,Presume to raise a trembling EyeTo Blessings so divine?4The Lustre of so bright a BlissMy feeble Heart o'erbears;And Unbelief almost pervertsThe Promise into Tears.5My Saviour GOD, no Voice but thineThese dying Hopes can raise:Speak thy Salvation to my Soul,And turn its Tears to Praise.6My Saviour GOD, this broken VoiceTransported shall proclaim,And call on all th' Angelick HarpsTo sound so sweet a Name.XXXVII. GOD'S Complacency in the Prosperity of his Servants. Psalm xxxv. 27.1THE LORD with Pleasure views his Saints,And calls them all his own,And low he bows to their Complaints,And pities ev'ry Groan.2In all the Joys, they here possess,He takes a tender Part;And, when they rise to heav'nly Bliss,Complacence fills his Heart.3My GOD, are all my Pleasures thine,My Comforts thy Delight?O be thy Happiness divineMost precious in my Sight.4They most in all thy Bliss shall share,Whose Hearts can love thee most;O could I vie in Ardor thereWith all th' Angelic Hosts.XXXVIII. The Days of the Upright known to GOD, and their everlasting Inheritance. Psalm xxxvii. 18.1TO thee, my GOD, my Days are known;My Soul enjoys the Thought:My Actions all before thy Face,Nor are my Faults forgot.2Each secret Breath Devotion ventsIs vocal to thine Ear;And all my Walks of daily LifeBefore thine Eye appear.3The vacant Hour, the active SceneThy Mercy shall approve;And ev'ry Pang of Sympathy,And ev'ry Care of Love.4Each golden Hour of beaming LightIs gilded by thy Rays;And dark Affliction's midnight GloomA present GOD surveys.5Full in thy View thro' Life I pass,And in thy View I dye;And, when each mortal Bond is broke,Shall find my GOD is nigh.6Strip'd of it's little earthly allMy Soul in Smiles shall go;
And in a heav'nly HeritageIt's Father's Bounty know.XXXIX. Our Desire and Groaning before GOD, when proceeding from the greatest Distress. Psal. xxxviii. 9. 10.1MY Soul, the awful Hour will come,Apace it passeth onTo bear this Body to the Tomb,And thee to Scenes unknown.2My Heart, long lab'ring with its Woes,Shall pant and sink away;And you, my Eye-lids, soon shall closeOn the last glim'ring Ray.3Whence in that Hour shall I receiveA Cordial for my Pain,When, if Earth's Monarchs were my Friends,Those Friends would weep in vain?4Great King of Nature, and of Grace,To thee my Spirit flies,And opens all its deep DistressBefore thy pitying Eyes.5All its Desires to thee are known,And ev'ry secret Fear,The Meaning of each broken GroanWell notic'd by thine Ear.6O fix me by that mighty Pow'r,Which to such Love belongs,Where Darkness veils the Eye no more,And Groans are chang'd to Songs.XL. GOD magnified by those that love his Salvation. Psalm xl. 16.1GOD of Salvation, we adoreThy saving Love, thy saving Pow'r;And to our utmost Stretch of ThoughtHail the Redemption thou hast wrought.2We love the Stroke, that breaks our Chain,The Sword, by which our Sins are slain;And, while abas'd in Dust we bow,We sing the Grace, that lays us low.3Perish each Thought of human Pride:Let GOD alone be magnified:His Glory let the Heav'ns resoundShouted from Earth's remotest Bound.4Saints, who his full Salvation know,Saints, who but taste it here below,Join ev'ry Angel's Voice to raiseContinu'd never-ending Praise.XLI. The Triumph of Christ in the Cause of Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness. Psalm xlv. 3. 4.1LOUD to the Prince of Heav'nYour chearful Voices raise!To him your Vows be giv'n,And fill his Courts with Praise.With conscious WorthAll-clad in Arms,All-bright in Charms,He sallies forth.2Gird on thy conqu'ring Sword,Ascend thy shining Car Chariot.,And march, Almighty LORD,To wage thy holy War.Before his WheelsIn glad SurprizeYe Valleys, rise,And sink, ye Hills.3Fair Truth, and smiling Love,And injur'd RighteousnessIn thy Retinue move,And seek from th Redress:Thou in their CauseShalt prosp'rous ride,And far and wideDispense thy Laws.4Before thine awful FaceMillions of Foes shall fall,The Captives of thy Grace,That Grace, which conquers all.The World shall know,Great King of Kings,What wond'rous ThingsThine Arm can do.5Here to my willing SoulBend thy triumphant Way;Here ev'ry Foe controul,And all thy Pow'r display.My Heart, thy Throne,Blest Jesus, seeBows low to thee,To thee alone.XLII. Quietness under Affliction a proper Acknowledgment of GOD. Psalm xlvi. 10.1PEACE, 'tis the LORD Jehovah's Hand,That blasts our Joys in Death;Changes the Visage once so dear,And gathers back our Breath.2'Tis he, the Potentate supremeOf all the Worlds above,Whose steady Counsels wisely rule,Nor from their Purpose move.3'Tis he, whose Justice might demandOur Souls a Sacrifice;Yet scatters with unwearied HandA thousand rich Supplies.4Our Cov'nant GOD and FATHER heIn CHRIST our bleeding LORD;Whose Grace can heal the bursting HeartWith one reviving Word.5Fair Garlands of immortal BlissHe weaves for ev'ry Brow;And shall tumultuous Passions rise,If he correct us now?6Silent I own Jehovah's Name;I kiss thy scourging Hand;And yield my Comforts, and my LifeTo thy supreme Command.XLIII. The Year crowned with the divine Goodness. Psalm lxv. 11. For New-Year's Day.1ETERNAL Source of ev'ry Joy!Well may thy Praise our Lips employ,While in thy Temple we appear,Whose Goodness crowns the circling Year.2Wide as the Wheels of Nature rollThy Hand supports the steady Pole:The Sun is taught by thee to rise,And Darkness when to veil the Skies.3The flow'ry Spring at thy CommandEmbalms the Air, and paints the Land;The Summer Rays with Vigour shineTo raise the Corn, and chear the Vine.4Thy Hand in Autumn richly poursThro' all our Coasts redundant Stores;And Winters, soft'ned by thy Care,No more a Face of Horror wear.5Seasons, and Months, and Weeks, and DaysDemand successive Songs of Praise;Still be the chearful Homage paidWith opening Light, and evening Shade.6Here in thy House shall Incense rise,As circling Sabbaths bless our Eyes;Still will we make thy Mercies known,Around thy Board, and round our own.7O may our more harmonious TonguesIn Worlds unknown persue the Songs;
And in those brighter Courts adore,Where Days and Years revolve no more.XLIV. Rebels against the supreme Sovereign admonished. Psalm lxvi. 7.1THE Lord of Glory reigns supremely great,And o'er Heav'ns Arches builds his royal Seat.Thro' Worlds unknown his sov'reign Sway extends,Nor Space nor Time his boundless Empire ends.His Eye beholds th' Affairs of ev'ry Nation,And reads each Thought through his immense Creation.2Lightnings, and Storms his mighty Word obey,And Planets roll, where he has mark'd their Way:Unnumber'd Cherubs vail'd before him stand,At his first Signal all their Wings expand;His Praise gives Harmony to all their Voices,And ev'ry Heart through the full Choir Company of Singers. rejoices.3Rebellious Mortals, cease your Tumults vain,Nor longer such unequal War maintain:Let Clay with Fellow-Clay in Combate strive,But dread to brave the Pow'r, by which you live:With contrite Hearts fall prostrate & adore him,For, if he frowns, ye perish all before him.XLV. GOD the Happiness of his People, and their Support in the extremest Distress. Psalm lxxiii. 25, 26.1MY GOD, whose all-pervading All-seeing. EyeViews Earth beneath, and Heav'n above,Witness, if here, or there thou seestAn Object of mine equal Love.2Not the gay Scenes, where mortal MenPersue their Bliss, and find their Woe,Detain my rising Heart, which springsThe nobler Joys of Heav'n to know.3Not all the fairest Sons of Light,That lead the Army round thy Throne,Can bound its Flight; it presseth on,And seeks it's Rest in GOD alone.4Fix'd near th' immortal Source of Bliss,Dauntless and joyous it surveysEach Form of Horror and Distress,That Earth, combin'd with Hell, can raise.5This feeble Flesh shall faint, and dye;This Heart renew its Pulse no more;Ev'n now it views the Moment nigh,When Life's last Movements all are o'er.6But come, thou vanquish'd King of Dread,With thine own Hand thy Pow'r destroy;'Tis thine to bear my Soul to GOD,My Portion, and eternal Joy.XLVI. The Rage of Enemies restrained, and overruled to the divine Glory. Psalm lxxvi. 10. Thanksgiving for the Suppression of the Rebellion. 1746.1ACCEPT, great GOD, thy Britain's Songs,While grateful Joy unites our TonguesTo own the Work, thy Hand has done:Thy Hand has crush'd our cruel Foes,When in rebellious Troops they rose,And swore to tread our Glory down.2With Hell confed'rate on their Side,People and Prince their Rage defied,And in proud Hope devour'd us all:Thy Hand its Banner has display'd,Beckon'd its Hero to our Aid,And in one Day their Legions fall.3Thus shalt thou still maintain thy Throne,And prove, that thou art GOD alone,Tho' Earth, and Hell new Efforts try:'Midst all the Tumult, they can raise,Envenom'd Wrath exalts thy Praise,Till hush'd at thy Rebuke it dye.4So swell the Surges great Waves. of the Sea,And roar in their impetuous Way,As they would deluge Earth again;So strike they on th' unshaken Rock,Dash'd by the Fierceness of their Shock,And foam to feel their Fury vain.XLVII. GOD furnishing a Table in the Wilderness. Psalm lxxviii. 19. 20.1PARENT of universal Good!We own thy bounteous Hand,Which does so rich a Table spread,Ev'n in this desart Land.2Struck by thy Pow'r the flinty RocksIn gushing Torrents flow;The feather'd Wand'rers of the AirThy guiding Instinct know.3The pregnant Clouds at thy CommandRain down delicious Bread;And by light Drops of pearly DewAre num'rous Armies fed.4Supported thus, thine Israel march'dThe promis'd Land to gain:And shall thy Children now beginTo seek their GOD in vain?5Are all thy Stores exhausted now?Or does thy Mercy fail?That Faith should languish in our BreastsAnd anxious Cares prevail?6Ye base unworthy Fears, be gone,And wide disperse in Air;Then may I feel my Father's Rod,When I suspect his Care.XLVIII. GOD'S speaking Peace to his People. Psalm lxxxv. 8.1UNITE, my roving Thoughts, uniteIn Silence soft and sweet:And thou, my Soul, sit gently downAt thy great Sov'reign's Feet.2Jehovah's awful Voice is heard,Yet gladly I attend;For lo! the everlasting GODProclaims himself my Friend.3Harmonious Accents to my SoulThe Sounds of Peace convey;The Tempest at his Word subsides,And Winds, and Seas obey.4By all its Joys, I charge my HeartTo grieve his Love no more;But, charm'd by Melody divine,To give its Follies o'er.XLIX. The Church the Birth-place of the Saints, and GOD'S Care of it. Psalm lxxxvii. 5. On opening a new Place of Worship.1AND will the great Eternal GODOn Earth establish his Abode?And will he from his radiant Throne,Avow our Temples for his own?2We bring the Tribute of our Praise,And sing that condescending Grace,
Which to our Notes will lend an Ear,And call us sinful Mortals near.3Our Father's watchful Care we bless,Which guards our Synagogues in Peace,That no tumultuous Foes invade,To fill our Worshippers with Dread.4These Walls we to thy Honour raise;Long may they eccho with thy Praise;And thou descending fill the PlaceWith choicest Tokens of thy Grace.5Here let the great Redeemer reignWith all the Graces of his Train;While Pow'r divine his Word attendsTo conquer Foes, and chear his Friends.6And in the great decisive Day,When GOD the Nations shall survey,May it before the World appear,That Crowds were born to Glory here.L. The Gospel Jubilee. Psalm lxxxix. 15. compared with Levit. xxv. and Isa. lxi. 2.1LOUD let the tuneful Trumpet sound,And spread the joyful Tidings round;Let ev'ry Soul with Transport hear,And hail the LORD'S accepted Year.Ye Debtors, whom he gives to know,That you ten thousand Talents owe,When humbled at his Feet ye fall,Your gracious LORD forgives them all.3Slaves, that have borne the heavy ChainOf Sin and Hell's tyrannic Reign,To Liberty assert your Claim,And urge the great Redeemer's Name.4The rich Inheritance you lost,Restor'd, improv'd, you now may boast;Fair Salem your Arrival waits,To golden Streets, and pearly Gates.5Her blest Inhabitants no moreBondage, and Poverty deplore:No Debt, but Love immensely great,Whose Joy still rises with the Debt.6O happy Souls that know the Sound!GOD'S Light shall all their Steps surround;And shew that Jubilee begun,Which thro' eternal Years shall run.LI. GOD the Dwelling-Place of his People thro' all Generations. Psalm xc. 1.1THOU, LORD, thro' ev'ry changing SceneHast to thy Saints a Refuge been:Thro' ev'ry Age, Eternal GOD,Their pleasing Home, their safe Abode.2In thee our Fathers sought their Rest;In thee our Fathers still are blest;And, while the Tomb confines their Dust,In thee their Souls abide, and trust.3Lo, we are ris'n, a feeble Race,A while to fill our Fathers Place;Our helpless State with Pity view,And let us share their Refuge too.4Thro' all the thorny Paths we traceIn this uncertain Wilderness,When Friends desert, and Foes invade,Revive our Heart, and guard our Head.5So when this Pilgrimage is o'er,And we must dwell in Flesh no more,To thee our sep'rate Souls shall come,And find in thee a surer Home.6To thee our Infant Race we leave;Them may their Father's GOD receive;That Voices yet unform'd may raiseSucceeding Hymns of humble Praise.LII. Reflections on our Waste of Years. Psal. xc. 9. For New-Year's Day.1REMARK, my Soul, the narrow BoundsOf the revolving Year!How swift the Weeks compleat their Rounds,How short the Months appear!2So fast Eternity comes on,And that important Day,When all that mortal Life has doneGOD'S Judgment shall survey.3Yet like an idle Tale we passThe swift-advancing Year;And study artful Ways t'increaseThe Speed of its Career.4Waken, O GOD, my trifling HeartIts great Concern to see;That I may act the Christian Part,And give the Year to thee.5So shall their Course more grateful roll,If future Years arise;Or this shall bear my smiling SoulTo Joy, that never dies.LIII. Joy and Prosperity from the Presence and Blessing of GOD. Psalm xc. 17.1SHINE on our Souls, Eternal GOD,With Rays of Beauty, shine:O let thy Favour crown our Days,And all their Round be thine.2Did we not raise our Hands to thee,Our Hands might toil in vain;Small Joy Success itself could give,If thou thy Love restrain.3With thee let ev'ry Week begin,With thee each Day be spent,For thee each fleeting Hour improv'd,Since each by thee is lent.4Thus chear us thro' this desart Road,Till all our Labours cease;And Heav'n refresh our weary SoulsWith everlasting Peace.LIV. The Mutability of the Creation, and the Immutability of GOD. Psalm cii. 25-28.1GREAT Former of this various Frame!Our Souls adore thine awful Name;And bow and tremble while they praiseThe Ancient of Eternal Days.2Thou, LORD, with unsurpriz'd SurveySaw'st Nature rising Yesterday;And, as To-morrow, shall thine EyeSee Earth, and Stars in Ruin lye.3Beyond an Angel's Vision bright,Thou dwell'st in self-existent Light;Which shines with undiminish'd Ray,While Suns, and Worlds in Smoke decay.4Our Days a transient Period run,And change with ev'ry circling Sun;And in the firmest State we boastA Moth can crush us into Dust.5But let the Creatures fall around:Let Death consign us to the Ground:Let the last gen'ral Flame arise,And melt the Arches of the Skies:6Calm as the Summer's Ocean, weCan all the Wreck Destruction. of Nature see,While Grace secures us an Abode,Unshaken as the Throne of GOD.LV. The Frailty of human Nature, and GOD'S gracious Regard to it. Psalm ciii. 14.1LORD, we adore thy wond'rous Name,And make that Name our Trust,Which rais'd at first this curious Frame,From mean, and lifeless Dust.2By Dust supported, still it stands,Wrought up to various Forms,Prepar'd by thy creating HandsTo nourish mortal Worms.3A while these frail Machines endure,The Fabrick of a Day;Then know their vital Pow'rs no more,But moulder back to Clay.4Yet, LORD, whate'er is felt or fear'd,This Thought is our Repose,That he, by whom this Frame was rear'd,Its various Weakness knows.5Thou view'st us with a pitying Eye,While strugling with our Load;In Pains and Dangers thou art nigh,Our Father, and our GOD.6Gently supported by thy Love,We tend to Realms of Peace;Where ev'ry Pain shall far remove,And ev'ry Frailty cease.LVI. GOD adored for his Goodness, and his wonderful Works, to the Children of Men. Psalm cvii. 31.1YE Sons of Men, with Joy recordThe various Wonders of the LORD;And let his Pow'r, and Goodness soundThro' all your Tribes the Earth around.2Let the high Heav'ns your Songs invite,Those spacious Fields of brilliant Light;Where Sun, and Moon, and Planets roll,And Stars, that glow from Pole to Pole.3Sing Earth in verdant Robes array'd,Its Herbs and Flow'rs, its Fruit and Shade;
Peopled with Life of various Forms,Fishes, and Fowl, and Beasts, and Worms.4View the broad Sea's majestick Plains,And think how wide its Maker reigns;That Band remotest Nations joins,And on each Wave his Goodness shines.5But O! that brighter World above,Where lives and reigns incarnate Love!GOD'S only Son in Flesh array'd,For Man a bleeding Victim Sacrifice. made.6Thither, my Soul, with Rapture soar;There in the Land of Praise adore;This Theme demands an Angel's Lay Song.,Demands an undeclining Day.LVII. The holy Soul returning to its Restin a grateful Sense of divine Bounties. Psa. cxvi. 7.1RETURN my Soul, and seek thy RestUpon thy heav'nly Father's Breast:Indulge me, LORD, in that Repose,The Soul which loves thee only knows.2Lodg'd in thine Arms I fear no moreThe Tempest's Howl, the Billows Roar:Those Storms must shake th' Almighty's Seat,Which violate the Saints Retreat.3Thy Bounties, LORD, to me surmountThe Pow'r of Language to recount;From Morning Dawn, the setting SunSees but my Work of Praise begun.4The Mercies, all my Moments bring,Ask an Eternity to sing;What Thanks those Mercies can suffice,Which thro' Eternity shall rise?5Rich in ten thousand Gifts possess'd,In future Hopes more richly bless'd,I'll sit and sing, till Death shall raiseA Note of more proportion'd Praise.LVIII. Deliverance celebrated. Psalm cxvi. 8.1LOOK back, my Soul, with grateful LoveOn what thy GOD has done;Praise him for his unnumber'd Gifts,And praise him for his Son.2How oft has his indulgent HandMy flowing Eye-Lids dried,And rescu'd from impending Death,When I in Danger cried!3When on the Bed of Pain I lay,With Sickness sore oppress'd,How oft has he asswag'd my Grief,And lull'd my Eyes to Rest!4Back from Destruction's yawning PitAt his Command I came;He fed th' expiring Lamp anew,And rais'd its feeble Flame.5My broken Spirit he has chear'd,When torn with inward Grief;And, when Temptations press'd me sore,Has brought me swift Relief.6My Soul from everlasting DeathIs by his Mercy brought,To tell in Zion's sacred GatesThe Wonders he has wrought.7Still will I walk before his Face,While he this Life prolongs;Till Grace shall all its Work compleat,And teach me heav'nly Songs.LIX. Deliverance celebrated, and good Resolutions formed. Psalm cxvi. 8, 9.1GREAT Source of Life, our Souls confessThe various Riches of thy Grace;Crown'd with thy Mercy we rejoice,And in thy Praise exalt our Voice.2By thee Heav'ns shining Arch was spread;By thee were Earth's Foundations laid,And all the Charms of Mens AbodeProclaim the wise, the gracious GOD.3Thy tender Hand restores our Breath,When trembling on the Verge of Death;Gently it wipes away our Tears,And lengthens Life to future Years.4These Lives are sacred to the LORD;Kindled by him, by him restor'd;And while our Hours renew their Race,Still would we walk before his Face.5So when by him our Souls are ledThro' unknown Regions of the Dead,
With Joy triumphant shall they moveTo Seats of nobler Life above.LX. Praise for Recovery from Sickness. Psalm cxviii. 18, 19.1SOV'REIGN of Life, I own thy HandIn ev'ry chast'ning Stroke;And, while I smart beneath thy Rod,Thy Presence I invoke.2To thee in my Distress I cried,And thou hast bow'd thine Ear,Thy pow'rful Word my Life prolong'd,And brought Salvation near.3Unfold, ye Gates of Righteousness,That, with the pious Throng,I may record my solemn Vows,And tune my grateful Song.4Praise to the LORD, whose gentle HandRenews our lab'ring Breath:Praise to the LORD, who makes his SaintsTriumphant ev'n in Death.5My GOD, in thine appointed HourThose heav'nly Gates display,Where Pain, and Sin, and Fear, and DeathFor ever flee away.6There, while the Nations of the Bless'dWith Raptures bow around,My Anthems to deliv'ring GraceIn sweeter Strains shall sound.LXI. Regard to Scripture pressed upon young Persons, that they may cleanse their Way. Psalm cxix. 9.1INDULGENT GOD, with pitying EyeThe Sons of Men survey,And see how youthful Sinners sportIn a destructive Way.2Ten thousand Dangers lurk aroundTo bear them to the Tomb;Each in an Hour may plunge them down,Where Hope can never come.3Reduce, O LORD, their wand'ring Minds,Amus'd with airy Dreams,That heav'nly Wisdom may dispell,Their visionary Schemes.4With holy Caution may they walk,And be thy Word their Guide;Till each, the Desart safely pass'd,On Zion's Hill abide.LXII. Desires of being quickned by the Word of GOD. Psalm cxix. 25.1WITH Pity, LORD, thy Servant view,As in the Dust I lye,Nor, while I raise my plaintive mournful. Voice,Disdain the broken Cry.2Fain would I mount on Eagles Wings,And view thy lovely Face;
But cumb'rous Burdens drag me downFrom thine ador'd Embrace.3Thy quick'ning Energy diffuseO'er all my inmost Frame;And animate these languid LipsTo celebrate thy Name.4Thy living Word has Wonders wrought,Those Wonders here renew;And pour fresh Vigour thro' my Soul,While I its Glory view.5From thee, Great ever-flowing Spring,Let vital Streams descend;And chear me to begin those Songs,Which Death shall never end.LXIII. Human Perfection no where to be found. Psalm cxix. 96.1PERFECTION! 'Tis an empty Name,Nor can repay our Cares;And he, that seeks it here below,Must end the Search with Tears.2Great David on his royal Throne,The beauteous, and the strong,Rich in the Spoils of conquer'd Foes,Amidst the applauding Throng,3With all his Mind's capacious Pow'rs,Persu'd the Shade in vain;Nor heard it his melodious Voice,Or Harp's Angelick Strain.4From publick to domestick ScenesTh' impatient Monarch turns;The Friend, the Husband, and the Sire Father.In sad Succession mourns.5At length thy Law, Eternal GOD,He thro' his Tears descrys discerns.,And, wrapt amidst those sacred Folds,He finds the heav'nly Prize.6There will I seek Perfection too,Where David's GOD is known:Nor envy, with this Volume blest,His Treasures, and his Throne.LXIV. Beholding Transgressors with Grief. Psalm cxix. 136, 158.1ARISE, my tend'rest Thoughts arise;To Torrents melt my streaming Eyes;And thou, my Heart, with Anguish feel,Those Evils, which thou canst not heal.2See human Nature sunk in Shame;See Scandals pour'd on Jesus Name;The Father wounded thro' the Son;The World abus'd; the Soul undone.3See the short Course of vain DelightClosing in everlasting Night;In Flames, that no Abatement know,Tho' briny Tears for ever flow.4My GOD, I feel the mournful Scene;My Bowels yearn o'er dying Men;
And fain my Pity would reclaim,And snatch the Fire-brands from the Flame.5But feeble my Compassion proves,And can but weep, where most it loves:Thine own all-saving Arm employ,And turn these Drops of Grief to Joy.LXV. The wandering Sheep recovered. Psalm cxix. 176.1LORD, we have wander'd from thy Way;Like follish Sheep, have gone astray;Our pleasant Pastures we have left,And of their Guard our Souls bereft deprived..2Expos'd to Want, expos'd to Harm;Far from our gentle Shepherd's Arm;Nor will these fatal Wand'rings cease,Till thou reveal the Paths of Peace.3O seek thy thoughtless Servants, LORD,Nor let us quite forget thy Word;Our erring Souls do thou restore,And keep us, that we stray no more.LXVI. The weeping Seed-Time, and joyful Harvest. Psalm cxxvi. 5, 6.1THE dark'ned Sky! how thick it lowrs!Troubled with Storms, and big with Show'rs;No chearful Gleam of Light appears,But Nature pours forth all her Tears.2Yet let the Sons of Grace revive;GOD bids the Soul, that seeks him, live,And from the gloomiest Shade of NightCalls forth a Morning of Delight.3The Seeds of Extacy unknownAre in these water'd Furrows sown;See the green Blades how thick they rise,And with fresh Verdure bless our Eyes.4In secret Foldings they containUnnumber'd Ears of golden Grain;And Heav'n shall pour its Beams around,Till the ripe Harvest load the Ground.5Then shall the trembling Mourner come,And find his Sheaves, and bear them home:The Voice long broke with Sighs shall sing,Till Heav'n with Hallelujahs ring.LXVII. Thanks to GOD for his ever-enduring Goodness. Psalm cxxxvi. 1.For New-Year's Day.1HOUSE of our GOD, with chearful Anthems ring,While all our Lips and Hearts his Graces sing;The op'ning Year his Graces shall proclaim,And all its Days be vocal with his Name.The Lord is good, his Mercy never-ending;His Blessings in perpetual Show'rs descending.2The Heav'n of Heav'ns he with his Bounty fills:Ye Seraphs bright on ever-blooming Hills
His Honours sound; you to whom Good alone,Unmingled, ever-growing has been known.Thro' your immortal Life, with Love increasing,Proclaim your Maker's Goodness never-ceasing.3Thou Earth, enlightned by his Rays divine,Pregnant with Grass, & Corn, & Oil, & Wine,Crown'd with his Goodness, let thy Nations meet,And lay their Crowns at his paternal Feet:With grateful Love, that lib'ral Hand confessing,Which thro' each Heart diffuseth ev'ry Blessing.4Zion enrich'd with his distinguish'd Grace,Blest with the Rays of thine Emanuel's Face,Zion, Jehovah's Portion, and Delight,Grav'n on his Hands, and hourly in his Sight,In sacred Strains exalt that Grace excelling,Which makes thy humble Hill his chosen Dwelling.5His Mercy never ends; the Dawn, the ShadeStill see new Bounties thro' new Scenes display'd:Succeeding Ages bless this sure Abode,And Children lean upon their Father's GOD.The deathless Soul thro' its immense DurationDrinks from this Source immortal Consolation.6Burst into Praise, my Soul; all Nature join;Angels and Men in Harmony combine:While human Years are measur'd by the Sun,And while Eternity its Course shall run,His Goodness, in perpetual Show'rs descending,Exalt in Songs, and Raptures never-ending.LXVIII. GOD's strengthening the Souls of his praying People. Psalm cxxxviii. 3.1MY Soul, review the trembling Days,In which my GOD I sought;I cry'd aloud for Aid divine,And Aid divine he brought.2Thro' all my weak and fainting HeartHis secret Strength he spread,And clasp'd me in his Arms of Love,And rais'd my drooping Head.3He call'd himself my Cov'nant GOD,His Promises he shew'd;And wide display'd their solemn SealIn the great Surety's Blood.4I heard his People shout around,And join'd their chearful Song;And saw from far the shining Seats,Which to his Saints belong.5My GOD, what inward Strength thou giv'stI to thy Service vow;And in thy Strength would upward march,Till at thy Throne I bow.LXIX. Singing in the Ways of GOD. Psalm cxxxviii. 5.1NOW let our Voices join,To form one pleasant Song:Ye Pilgrims in Jehovah's Ways,With Musick pass along.2How streight the Path appears,How open, and how fair!No lurking Gins t'entrap our Feet;No fierce Destroyer there:3But Flow'rs of ParadiseIn rich Profusion spring;The Sun of Glory gilds the Path,And dear Companions sing.4See Salem's golden SpiresIn beauteous Prospect rise;And brighter Crowns than Mortals wear,Which sparkle thro' the Skies.5All Honour to his Name,Who drew the shining Trace;To him, who leads the Wand'rers on,And chears them with his Grace.6Reduce the Nations, LORD,Teach all their Kings thy Ways,That Earth's full Choir the Notes may swell,And Heav'n resound the Praise.LXX. The innumerable Mercies of GOD thankfully acknowledged. Psalm cxxxix. 17, 18.1IN glad Amazement, LORD, I standAmidst the Bounties of thy Hand;How numberless those Bounties are!How rich, how various, and how fair!2But O! what poor Returns I make!What lifeless Thanks I pay thee back!
LORD, I confess with humble Shame,My Off'rings scarce deserve the Name.3Fain would my lab'ring Heart deviseTo bring some nobler Sacrifice:It sinks beneath the mighty Load.What shall I render to my GOD?4To him I consecrate my Praise,And vow the Remnant of my Days;Yet what at best can I pretend,Worthy such Gifts from such a Friend?5In deep Abasement, LORD, I seeMy Emptiness and Poverty:Enrich my Soul with Grace divine,And make it worthier to be thine.6Give me at length an Angel's Tongue,That Heav'n may eccho with my Song;The Theme, too great for Time, shall beThe Joy of long Eternity.LXXI. Praising GOD through the whole of our Existence. Psalm cxlvi. 2.1GOD of my Life, thro' all its DaysMy grateful Pow'rs shall sound thy Praise;The Song shall wake with op'ning Light,And warble to the silent Night.2When anxious Cares would break my Rest,And Griefs would tear my throbbing Breast,Thy tuneful Praises rais'd on highShall check the Murmur, and the Sigh.3When Death o'er Nature shall prevail,And all its Pow'rs of Language fail,Joy thro' my swimming Eyes shall break,And mean the Thanks I cannot speak.4But O! when that last Conflict's o'er,And I am chain'd to Flesh no more,With what glad Accents shall I riseTo join the Musick of the Skies!5Soon shall I learn th' exalted Strains,Which eccho o'er the heav'nly Plains;And emulate with Joy unknownThe glowing Seraphs round thy Throne.6The chearful Tribute will I give,Long as a deathless Soul can live;A Work so sweet, a Theme so highDemands, and crowns Eternity.LXXII. The Meek beautified with Salvation. Psalm cxlix. 4.1YE humble Souls, rejoice,And chearful Triumphs sing;Wake all your Harmony of Voice,For Jesus is your King.2That meek and lowly Lord,Whom here your Souls have known,Pledges the Honour of his WordT' avow you for his own.3He brings Salvation near,For which his Blood was paid:How beauteous shall your Souls appearThus sumptuously array'd!4Sing, for the Day is nigh,When near your Leader's SeatThe tallest Sons of Pride shall lye,The Footstool of your Feet.5Salvation, Lord, is thine;And all thy Saints confessThe royal Robes, in which they shine,Were wrought by sov'reign Grace.LXXIII. The Reproofs of Wisdom mingled with Promises, and Threatnings to reclaim wandering Sinners. Proverbs i. 23.1HARK! for 'tis Wisdom's Voice,That breaks in gentle Sound:Listen, ye Sons of Earth and Sin,And gather all around.2What tho' she speaks Rebukes,That pierce the Soul with Smart;True Love thro' all her Chast'nings runsBy Pain to mend the Heart.3"Ye that have wander'd long"In Sin's destructive Ways,"Turn, turn the heav'nly Charmer cries,"And seize the offer'd Grace.4"I know your Souls are weak,"And mortal Efforts vain"To grapple with the Prince of Hell,"And break his cursed Chain.5"But I'll my Spirit pour"In Torrents from above,
"To arm you with superior Strength,"And melt your Hearts in Love.6"Come while these Offers last,"Ye Sinners, and be wise:"He lives, who hears this friendly Call,"But he that slights it, dies."LXXIV. The Voice of CHRIST addressed to the Children of Men. Proverbs viii. 4.1NOW let the list'ning World aroundIn silent Rev'rence hear;While from on high the Saviour's VoiceThus strikes th' attentive Ear.2"To you, O Sons of Men, I call;"And from my lofty Throne"Reclin'd in gentle Pity bow"To bring Salvation down.3"Ye thoughtless Sinners, hear my Voice,"Attend my Words and live;"My Words conduct to solid Joys,"And endless Blessings give.4"Each faithful Minister is sent"This Message to proclaim;"In ev'ry various Providence"The Language is the same."And could the pale forgotten Dead,"Tho' deep in Dust they lye,"Arise in visionary Crouds,"They'd join the solemn Cry.6"Forgetful Mortals, yet be wise,"While o'er the Grave ye stand;"Lest long-neglected Love provoke"The Vengeance of my Hand.7"In glad Submission bow ye down,"Nor steel that stubborn Heart;"'Till mine inexorable Voice"Pronounce the Word, Depart."8Blest Jesus, may thy Spirit breatheOn Souls, which else must dye;For, till thy Grace reflect the Sound,Thy Word in vain will cry.LXXV. The Encouragement young Persons have to seek, and love CHRIST. Prov. viii. 17.1YE Hearts with youthful Vigour warm,In smiling Crouds draw near,And turn from ev'ry mortal Charm,A Saviour's Voice to hear.2He, LORD of all the Worlds on high,Stoops to converse with you;And lays his radiant Glories byYour Friendship to persue.3"The Soul that longs to see my Face"Is sure my Love to gain;"And those, that early seek my Grace,"Shall never seek in vain."4What Object, LORD, my Soul should move,If once compar'd with thee?
What Beauty should command my Love,Like what in Christ I see?5Away, ye false delusive Toys,Vain Tempters of the Mind!'Tis here I fix my lasting Choice,And here true Bliss I' find.LXXVI. The House and Feast of Wisdom. Prov. ix. 1,-6.1SEE the fair Structure Wisdom rears,Her Messengers attend;And charm'd by her persuasive Voice,To her your Footsteps bend.2"Hear me, ye simple ones she cries,"That lur'd seduced. by Folly stray,"And languish to eternal Death"In her detested Way.3"Enter my hospitable Gate,"And all my Banquet share;"For heav'nly Wine surrounds my Board,"And Angels Food is there.4"Freely of every Dainty taste,"Taste, and for ever live;"And mingle with your Joys the Hopes"Of all a God can give.5"But if seduc'd by Folly's Arts,"Ye seek her pois'nous Food;"Know, that the dreadful Moment hasts,"Which pays the Feast with Blood."LXXVII. The Excellency of the Righteous, with Regard to their Temper. Prov. xii. 26. Part 1st.1HOW glorious, LORD, art thou!How bright thy Splendors shine!Whose Rays reflected gild thy SaintsWith Ornaments divine.2With Lowliness, and Love,Wisdom and Courage meet;The grateful Heart, the chearful Eye,How rev'rend and how sweet!3In Beauties such as these,Thy Children now are drest;But brighter Habits shall they wearIn Regions of the Blest.4In Nature's barren Soil,Who could such Glories raise?We own, O GOD, the Work is thine,And thine be all the Praise.LXXVIII. The Excellency of the Righteous, with Regard to their Relations, Employments, Pleasures, and Hopes. Prov. xii. 26. Part 2d.1O Israel, thou art blest;Who may with thee compare!Thine Excellencies stand confess'd;How bright thy Glories are!2O GOD of Israel, hear,And make this Bliss our own;
Make us the Children of thy Care,The Members of thy Son.3Thus honour'd, thus employ'd,By these great Motives fir'd,Be Paradise on Earth enjoy'd,And brighter Hopes inspir'd.Thy People, LORD, we love;Their GOD our Souls embrace;So may we find in Worlds aboveAmong thy Saints a Place.LXXIX. Walking with GOD, or being in his Fear all the Day long. Proverbs xxiii. 17.1THRICE happy Souls, who born from Heav'n,While yet they sojourn here,Thus all their Days with GOD begin,And spend them in his Fear!2So may our Eyes with holy ZealPrevent the dawning Day;And turn the sacred Pages The holy Scriptures. o'er,And praise thy Name and pray.3Midst hourly Cares may Love presentIt's Incense to thy Throne;And while the World our Hands employs,Our Hearts be thine alone.4As sanctified to noblest EndsBe each Refreshment sought;
And by each various ProvidenceSome wise Instruction brought.5When to laborious Duties call'd,Or by Temptations try'd,We'll seek the Shelter of thy Wings,And in thy Strength confide.6As diff'rent Scenes of Life arise,Our grateful Hearts would beWith thee, amidst the social Band,In Solitude with thee.7At Night we lean our weary HeadsOn thy paternal Breast;And, safely folded in thine Arms,Resign our Pow'rs to rest.8In solid pure Delights, like these,Let all my Days be past;Nor shall I then impatient wish,Nor shall I fear, the last.LXXX. The obstinate Sinner alarmed. Proverbs xxix. 1.1NOW let the Sons of BelialDisobedient rebellious Persons. hearThe Thunders of the LORD;Unfold their long rebellious Ear,And tremble at his Word.2Now let the Iron-Sinew bow,And take his easy Yoke;Lest sudden Vengeance lay it low,By one resistless Stroke.3Tho' yet the great Physician wait,And healing Balm be found;One Hour may seal their endless Fate,And fix a deadly Wound.4Swift may thy Mercy, LORD, arise,E'er Justice stop their Breath;And lighten these deluded Eyes,That sleep the Sleep of Death.LXXXI. GOD'S reasonable Expectations from his Vineyard. Isaiah v. 1. 7.1THE Vineyard of the LORD how fair!Planted by his peculiar Care:Behold its Branches spread, and fillThe Borders of his sacred Hill.2His Eye has mark'd the chosen Ground;His mighty Hand has fenc'd it round;His Servants by his Order wait,To watch and aid its tender State.3But when the Vintage he demandsFor all the Labour of their Hands,What Clusters does his Vine produce?The Grapes are wild; and sour the Juice.4Well might he tear its Fence away,And leave it to the Beasts of Prey,Might give it to the Wild again,And charge his Clouds to cease their Rain.5But spare our Land, our Churches spare,Thy Vengeance long-provok'd forbear;
Let the true Vine its Influence give,And bid our with'ring Branches live.LXXXII. Isaiah's Obedience to the heavenly Vision. Isaiah vi. 8.1OUR GOD ascends his lofty Throne,Array'd in Majesty unknown;His Lustre all the Temple fills,And spreads o'er all th' ethereal heavenly. Hills.2The holy, holy, holy LORD,By all the Seraphim ador'd,And, while they stand beneath his Seat,They veil their Faces, and their Feet.3And can a sinful Worm endureThe Presence of a GOD so pure?Or these polluted Lips proclaim,The Honours of so grand a Name?4O for thine Altar's glowing Coal,To touch my Lips, to fire my Soul,To purge the sordid Dross away,And into Crystal turn my Clay.5Then if a Messenger thou ask,A Lab'rer for the hardest Task,Thro' all my Weakness, and my Fear,Love shall reply, "Thy Servant's here".6Nor should my willing Soul complain,Tho' all it's Efforts seem'd in vain;It ample Recompence shall be,But to have wrought, my GOD, for thee.LXXXIII. The Stupidity of Israel, and of Britain lamented. Isaiah vi. 9-12. For a Fast-Day.1LORD, when thine Israel we survey,We in their Crimes discern our own;And if thou turn our Pray'r away,Our Mis'ry must, like their's, be known.2To us thy Prophets have been sent,With Words of Terror and of Love;But nor the Vengeance, nor the GraceTen thousand stubborn Hearts will move.3Our Eyes are blind, and deaf our Ears;Our Hearts are hard'ned into Stone;As we would bear thy Mercy out,And leave a Way for Wrath alone.4Justly our GOD might give us upTo Plague and Famine and the Sword;Till Towns and Cities rich and fairLay desolate without a Lord.5O'er bleeding Wounds of slaughter'd FriendsRivers of helpless Grief might flow,Till the fierce Conqu'ror's haughty RageDrag'd us to Chains and Slaughter too.6But spare a Nation long thine own,And shew new Miracles of Grace;'Tis thine to heal the Deaf and Blind,And wake the Dead to Life and Praise.LXXXIV. Confederate Nations defied by those who sanctify GOD. Isaiah viii. 9-14. For a Fast-Day.1GREAT GOD of Hosts, attend our Pray'r,And make the British Isles thy Care:To thee we raise our suppliant Cries,When angry Nations round us rise.2Fain would they tread our Glory down,And in the Dust defile our Crown,Deluge our Houses with our Blood,And burn the Temples of our GOD.3But 'midst the Thunder of their Rage,We thy Protection would engage:O raise thy saving Arm on high,And bring renew'd Deliv'rance nigh.4May Britain, as one Man, be ledTo make the LORD her Fear and Dread;Our Souls no other Fear shall know,Tho' Earth were leagu'd with Hell below.5Give Ear, ye Countries from afar;Ye proud associate Nations, hear;While fix'd on him, who rules the Sky,Our Hearts your threatned War defy.6Ye People, gird your selves in vain,Your scatter'd Force unite again;Again shall all that Force be broke,When GOD with us shall deal the Stroke.7Now he records our humble Tears,With ardent Vows for future Years,
And destines for approaching DaysVictorious Shouts, and Songs of Praise.8Emanuel's Land shall safe remain,Blest with its Saviour's gentle Reign;Till ev'ry hostile Rumour ceaseIn the fair Realms of perfect Peace.LXXXV. CHRIST the Steward of GOD'S Family. Isaiah xxii. 22-24. compared with Revel. iii. 7.1WITH what Delight I raise mine Eyes,And view the Courts, where Jesus dwells!Jesus, who reigns beyond the Skies,And here below his Grace reveals.2Of David's royal House the KeyIs borne by that majestick Hand;Mansions and Treasures there I seeSubjected all to his Command.3He shuts, and Worlds might strive in vainThe mighty Obstacle to move;He looses all their Bars again,And who shall shut the Gates of Love?4Fix'd in Omnipotence he bearsThe Glories of his Father's Name,Sustains his People's weighty Cares,Thro' ev'ry changing Age the same.5My little All I there suspend,Where the whole Weight of Heav'n is hung:Secure I rest on such a Friend,And into Raptures wake my Tongue.LXXXVI. The rich Provision and happy Effects of the Gospel. Isaiah xxv. 6-9.1BEHOLD our GOD, he owns his Name;Jehovah all our Songs proclaimWith Shouts of Wonder and of Joy:Long have we waited for his Grace,No longer now his Love delaysFor Zion his own Armt' employ.2We charge our Souls the Joy to feel:We charge our Tongues his Praise to tell:Th' Almighty Saviour! This is he!He pours his Streams of Grace abroad,Till all the Earth confess the GOD,And Lands remote his Glory see.3Dainties how rich his Stores afford!How pure the Wine, that crowns his Board!While welcome Nations flock around:He takes the Veil of Grief away;Thro' thickest Shades he darts the Day,And not one weeping Eye is found.4All-conqu'ring Death, no longer boastO'er Millions humbled in the Dust;Our GOD with Scorn thy Triumph sees:Soon as he aims one Shaft Arrow. at thee,Swallow'd and lost in Victory,Thine Empire, and thy Name shall cease.LXXXVII. The peaceful State of the Soul, that trusteth in GOD. Isaiah xxvi. 3.1WEARY and weak and faint,I cast mine Eyes around;My Joints all tremble, and my FeetSink deep in miry Ground.2Despairing Help below,To Heav'n I raise my Cries;GOD hears, and his almighty ArmOut-stretches from the Skies.3I on that Arm repose,And all my Fears are o'er;New Strength diffus'd thro' all my SoulAssists its vital Pow'r.4My Mind in perfect PeaceThy guardian Care shall keep:I'll yield to gentle Slumbers now,For thou canst never sleep.5Happy the Souls alone,On thee securely stay'd!Nor shall they be in Life alarm'd,Nor be in Death dismay'd.LXXXVIII. Israel's Obstinacy under GOD'S lifted Hand. Isaiah xxvi. 11.1LORD, when thy Hand is lifted up,The wicked will not see;But they shall see with glowing Shame,Tho' they obdurate be.2How few the weighty Stroke regard,And seek their Maker's Face!In vain may Providence correct,If not inforc'd by Grace.3Exert thy mighty Influence, LORD,And melt the stony Breast;Then shall thy Justice be ador'd,Thy Mercy stand confess'd.4The Scorner then shall mourn in Dust,And put his Sins away,No more resist his Maker's Hands,But lift his own to pray.LXXXIX. GOD'S quickening the Dead. Isaiah xxvi. 19.1THE Ever-living GODTh' expiring Church shall raise;Our Hearts his Promises receive,And wake a Shout of Praise.2Death shall not always reign,Where Grace hath fix'd its Throne;His soft Compassion views the Dust,He once hath call'd his own.3"Yes," saith the GOD of Truth,"My Dead shall live again;"The Foe shall see their Leader's Breath"Reanimate the Slain.4"The Dew of Heaven shall fall"In rich Abundance round,
"And a redundant Harvest rise"To cloath the teeming Ground.5"Now from your Dust awake,"And burst into a Song;"Then spurn the Earth, and mount the Skies"In a triumphant Throng."6Thy Zion, LORD, believesA Promise so divine,And looks thro' all her flowing TearsTo see the Glory shine.XC. The Godly Man's Ark. Isaiah xxvi. 20.1IT is my Father's Voice;And O! how sweet the Sound!It makes mine inmost Pow'rs rejoice,My trembling Heart rebound.2"Mark, the black Tempest lours,"And gathers round the Sky;"Retire and shun the sweeping Show'rs"Of Indignation nigh.3"Come, my dear Children, come,"And seek your Father's Arms;"There is your Shelter, there your Home,"'Midst all these dire Alarms.4"Enter at his Command;"Close in your Ark remain;"And wait the Signal of his Hand"To call you forth again.5"The Moments to beguile"A chearful Song begin;
"Nor let the roaring Thunders spoil"The Harmony within.6"E'er long the Sky shall clear,"The Clouds be chas'd away,"And Grace shall shine in Radiance fair"Thro' an eternal Day."XCI. Laying hold on GOD'S Strength, that we may be at Peace with him. Isaiah xxvii. 5.1THUS saith Jehovah from his Seat,"Who shall presume my Wrath to meet?"What Rebel-Men or Angels dare"To wage with me unequal War?2"Close let the Thorns and Briars stand"In thick Array on either Hand;"Forth shall my flaming Terrors fly;"At once they kindle, blaze and dye.3"Presumptuous Sinners, yet be wise"E'er this o'erwhelming Ruin rise;"Your vain tumultuous Efforts cease,"And seek in suppliant Crouds for Peace".4Great GOD, we bless the gentle Sound,And bow submissive to the Ground;Thy prostrate Foes let Pity raise,And form a People to thy Praise.5His thund'ring Storms are silent now;Calm are the Terrors of his Brow,Since Jesus makes the Father known,Our guardian Shield, our chearing Sun.XCII. The divine Goodness in moderating Affictions. Isaiah xxvii. 8.1GREAT Ruler of all Nature's Frame,We own thy Pow'r divine:We hear thy Breath in ev'ry Storm,For all the Winds are thine.2Wide as they sweep their sounding Way,They work thy sov'reign Will;And aw'd by thy majestick VoiceConfusion shall be still.3Thy Mercy tempers moderates. ev'ry BlastTo them that seek thy Face;And mingles with the Tempest's RoarThe Whispers of thy Grace.4Those gentle Whispers let me hear,Till all the Tumult cease;And Gales of Paradise shall lullMy weary Soul to Peace.XCIII. GOD waiting to be gracious. Isaiah xxx. 18.1WAIT on the LORD, ye Heirs of Hope,And let his Word support your Souls:Well can he bear your Courage up,And all your Foes and Fears controul.2He waits his own well-chosen HourTh' intended Mercy to display;
And his paternal Bowels move,While Wisdom dictates the Delay.3With mingled Majesty and LoveAt length he rises from his Throne;And, while Salvation he commands,He makes his People's Joy his own.4Blest are the humble Souls, that waitWith sweet Submission to his Will;Harmonious all their Passions move,And in the midst of Storms are still.5Still, till their Father's well-known VoiceWakens their Silence into Songs:Then Earth grows vocal with his Praise,And Heav'n the grateful Shout prolongs.XCIV. The different Views of good and bad Men in Times of publick Danger. Isaiah xxxiii. 14-17.1SEE, the Destruction is begun,And Heaps of Ruin spread the Ground;With hasty Strides it marches on,And scatters Consternation round.2Sinners in Zion take th' Alarm,The Hypocrites astonish'd cry,Who with devouring Flames can dwell?Who in eternal Burnings lie?3GOD'S gracious Voice the Saint revives,How sweet the heav'nly Accents sound!"Dwell thou on high, my Child," he says,"Where Rocks shall guard thee all around.4"There shall my Hand thy Wants supply,"Thy Water and thy Bread are sure;"There shall my Visits make thee glad,"While these alarming Scenes endure.5"Then, led in joyous Triumph forth,"Thine Eyes the distant Land shall view,"Shall see thy King in Beauty drest,"And share his royal Honours too".6My Soul the Oracle receives,And feels its Energy to chear;A promis'd Heav'n, a present GODForbids my Grief, forbids my Fear.XCV. GOD the Defence of his People from invading Enemies. Isaiah xxxiii. 21-23.1THE glorious LORD! his Israel's Hope!How well he bears their Courage up!How wide his saving Pow'r extends!His princely Titles will we sing,Our Judge, our Law-giver, our King,He guards his Subjects as his Friends.2Around the Mountain where they dwell,Lo, at his Word new Waters swellTo deluge the invading Foe!Open'd by him that rules the Skies,Mark the broad Rivers how they rise,And with what rapid Strength they flow!3To gain the well-defended ShoresIn vain the Galley spreads its Oars,And the proud Ship her Sails displays:
The Sails are rent, the Masts are broke,The shatter'd Oars all drop their Stroke,And Lightnings thro' the Tacklings blaze.4Shout your Hosannas to the LORD:Thus shall he still his Zion guard,Till the last Foe be trampled down:High as the Heav'ns exalt his Praise;High as the Heav'ns his Hand shall raiseThe Soul, that here his Grace hath known.XCVI. The High-Way to Zion. Isaiah xxxv. 8, 9, 10.1SING, ye Redeemed of the LORD,Your great Deliv'rer sing:Pilgrims for Zion's City bound,Be joyful in your King.2See the fair Way his Hand hath rais'd;How holy, and how plain!Nor shall the simplest Trav'lers err,Nor ask the Track in vain.3No rav'ning Lion shall destroy,Nor lurking Serpent wound;Pleasure and Safety, Peace and PraiseThro' all the Path are found.4A Hand divine shall lead you onThro' all the blissful Road;Till to the sacred Mount you rise,And see your smiling GOD.5There Garlands of immortal JoyShall bloom on ev'ry Head,
While Sorrow Sighing and DistressLike Shadows all are fled.6March on in your Redeemer's Strength;Pursue his Footsteps still;And let the Prospect chear your Eye,While lab'ring up the Hill.XCVII. The Greatness and Majesty of GOD, and the Meanness of the Creatures. Isaiah xl. 15, 16, 17.1YE weak Inhabitants of Clay,Ye trifling Insects of a Day,Low in your native Dust bow downBefore th' Eternal's awful Throne.2With trembling Heart, with solemn Eye,Behold JEHOVAH seated high;And search, what worthy SacrificeYour Hands can give, your Thoughts devise.3Let Lebanon her Cedars bringTo blaze before the sov'reign King,And all the Beasts, that on it feed,As Victims at his Altar bleed.4Loud let ten thousand Trumpets sound,And call remotest Nations round,Assembled on the crowded Plains,Princes and People, Kings and Swains.5Join'd with the Living, let the DeadRising the Face of Earth o'erspread;And, while his Praise unites their Tongues,Let Angels eccho back the Songs.6The Drop, that from the Bucket falls,The Dust, that hangs upon the Scales,Is more to Sky and Earth and Sea,Than all this Pomp, O GOD, to thee.XCVIII. The timorous Saint encouraged by the Assurance of the divine Presence and Help. Isaiah xli. 10.1AND art thou with us, gracious LORD,To dissipate our Fear?Dost thou proclaim thyself our GOD,Our GOD for ever near?2Doth thy right Hand, which form'd the Earth,And bears up all the Skies,Stretch from on high its friendly Aid,When Dangers round us rise?3Dost thou a Father's Bowels feelFor all thy humble Saints?And in such tender Accents speakTo soothe their sad Complaints?4On this Support my Soul shall lean,And banish ev'ry Care;The gloomy Vale of Death must smile,If GOD be with me there.5While I his gracious Succour prove'Midst all my various Ways,The darkest Shades, thro' which I pass,Shall eccho with his Praise.XCIX. The Humiliation and Exaltation of GOD'S Israel. Isaiah xli. 14, 15.1AMAZING Grace of GOD on high!And will the LORD look downOn Sinners, while in Dust they lie,And dread his awful Frown?2Weaker than Worms, O LORD, are we,And viler far than they;Yet in these Reptiles creeping Things. weak and vileDost thou thy Pow'r display.3Jehovah's sov'reign Voice is heard,The Worm lifts up its Head,And Mountains, that would crush it down,Before the Worm are fled.4Thou holy One, thine Israel's King,Thou our Redeemer art,Nor shall the Blessings of thy HandFrom thy Redeem'd depart.5Thy Love shall its own Work fulfil,And Grace shall rise on Grace,Till Worms of Earth around thy ThroneWith Angels find a Place.C. The Wilderness transformed, or the happy Effects of the Gospel. Isaiah xli. 18, 19. compared with xxxv. 1, 2. xi. 6-9. lv. 13, &c.1AMAZING beauteous Change!A World created new!
My Thoughts with Transport rangeThe lovely Scene to view;In all I trace,Saviour divine,The Work is thine,Be thine the Praise.2See Crystal Fountains playAmidst the burning Sands;The River's winding WayShines thro' the thirsty Lands:New Grass is seen,And o'er the MeadsIts Carpet spreadsOf living Green.3Where pointed Brambles grew,Entwin'd with horrid Thorn,Gay Flow'rs for ever newThe painted Fields adorn;The blushing Rose,And Lilly there,In Union fairTheir Sweets disclose.4Where the bleak Mountain stoodAll bare and disarray'd,See the wide-branching WoodDiffuse its grateful Shade;Tall Cedars nod,And Oaks and PinesAnd Elms and VinesConfess the GOD.5The Tyrants of the PlainTheir savage Chase give o'er,
No more they rend the Slain,And thirst for Blood no more;But Infant HandsFierce Tigers stroak,And Lions yokeIn flow'ry Bands.6O when, Almighty LORD,Shall these glad Scenes arise,To verify thy Word,And bless our wond'ring Eyes!That Earth may raise,With all its Tongues,United SongsOf ardent Praise.CI. The Blind and Weak led and supported in GOD'S Ways. Isaiah xlii. 16.1PRAISE to the radiant Source of Bliss,Who gives the Blind their Sight,And scatters round their wond'ring EyesA Flood of sacred Light.2In Paths unknown he leads them onTo his divine Abode,And shews new Miracles of GraceThro' all the heav'nly Road.3The Ways all rugged and perplex'dHe renders smooth and straight,And strengthens ev'ry feeble KneeTo march to Zion's Gate.4Thro' all the Path I'll sing his Name,Till I the Mount ascend,
Where Toils and Storms are known no more,And Anthems never end.CII. GOD calling his Israel by Name, and leading them thro' Water and Fire. Isa. xliii. 1, 2.1LET Jacob to his Maker sing,And praise his great redeeming King;Call'd by a new, a gracious Name,Let Israel loud his GOD proclaim.2He knows our Souls in all their Fears,And gently wipes our falling Tears,Forms trembling Voices to a Song,And bids the feeble Heart be strong.3Then let the Rivers swell around,And rising Floods o'erflow the Ground;Rivers and Floods and Seas divide,And Homage pay to Israel's Guide.4Then let the Fires their Rage display,And flaming Terrors bar the Way;Unburnt, unsing'd he leads them thro',And makes the Flames refreshing too.5The Fires but on their Bonds shall prey Allusion to the Story in Dan. iii. 19. &c.,The Floods but wash their Stains away,And Grace divine new Trophies Monuments of Victory. raiseAmidst the Deluge, and the Blaze.CIII. The Riches of pardoning Grace celebrated. Isaiah xliv. 22, 23.1LET Heav'n burst forth into a Song;Let Earth reflect the joyful Sound;Ye Mountains, with the Eccho ring,And shout, ye Forests all around.2The LORD his Israel hath redeem'd,Hath made his mourning People glad,And the rich Glories of his NameIn their Salvation hath display'd.3Unnumb'red Sins, like sable Clouds,Veil'd ev'ry chearful Ray of Joy,And Thunders murmur'd thro' the Gloom,While Lightnings pointed to destroy.4He spoke, and all the Clouds dispers'd,And Heav'n unveil'd its shining Face,The whole Creation smil'd anew,Deck'd in the golden Beams of Grace.5Israel, return with humble Love,Return to thy Redeemer's Breast,And charm'd by his melodious Voice,Compose thy weary Pow'rs to rest.CIV. The little Success which attended the personal Ministry of CHRIST. Isaiah xlix. 4.1AND doth the Son of GOD complain,"Lo, I have spent my Strength in vain,And stretch'd my Hands whole Days and YearsTo those, who slight my Words and Tears".2O stubborn Hearts, that could withstandSuch Efforts from a Saviour's Hand!O gracious Saviour, who would bleed,When Words and Tears could not succeed!3Fall down, my Soul, in humble Woe,That thou hast wrong'd his Goodness so:Now let his Grace resistless moveTo melt the stubborn Flint to Love.4All-glorious LORD, march forth and reign,And reap the Fruit of all thy Pain;And, till a nobler Scene appear,Begin the happy Conquest here.CV. GOD'S Captives released; applied to spiritual Deliverances. Isaiah li. 14, 15.1CAPTIVES of Israel, hear,Who now as Exiles banished Persons. mourn;See your Almighty GOD appearTo hasten your Return.2Jehovah is his Name;LORD of celestial Hosts:Let Heav'n that saving Pow'r proclaimIn which his Israel trusts.3Tho' helpless now ye lie,As in a Dungeon thrown,When parch'd with painful Thirst ye cry,And when your Bread is gone,4Deliv'rance comes apace;Ye shall not there expire;
Prepare to sing redeeming GraceWith his triumphant Choir.5He smote the raging Sea'Midst its tumultuous Roar,And pav'd his chosen Troops a WaySafe to its distant Shore.6In him let Israel hope,At whose supreme CommandGraves yield their breathless Captives up,And Seas become dry Land.CVI. The Cup of Fury exchanged for the Cup of Blessings. Isaiah li. 22.1THE LORD, our LORD, how rich his Grace!What Stores of sov'reign LoveFor humble Souls, that seek his Face,And to his Footstool move!He pleads the Cause of all his Saints,When Foes against them rise;He listens to their sad Complaints,And wipes their streaming Eyes.3He takes away that dreadful CupOf Fury and of Plagues,Which Justice sentenc'd them to drink,And wring the bitter Dregs.4He gave it to their Saviour's Hand,And fill'd it to the Brim;Their Saviour drank the liquid Death,That they might live by him.5"Now take the Cup of Life, he cries,"Where heav'nly Blessings flow:"Drink deep, nor fear to drain the Spring,"To which the Draught ye owe".6We drink, and feel our Life renew'd,And all our Woes forget:We drink, till that transporting Hour,When we our Lord shall meet.CVII. The holy City purified and guarded. Isaiah lii. 1, 2.1TRIUMPHANT Zion, lift thy HeadFrom Dust and Darkness and the Dead;Tho' humbled long, awake at length,And gird thee with thy Saviour's Strength.2Put all thy beauteous Garments on,And let thy various Charms be known;The World thy Glories shall confess,Deck'd in the Robes of Righteousness.3No more shall Foes unclean invade,And fill thy hallow'd Walls with Dread;No more shall Hell's insulting HostTheir Vict'ry, and thy Sorrows boast.4GOD from on high thy Groans will hear;His Hand thy Ruins shall repair;Rear'd and adorn'd by Love divine,Thy Tow'rs and Battlements shall shine.5Grace shall dispose my Heart and VoiceTo share, and eccho back her Joys;Nor will her watchful Monarch ceaseTo guard her in eternal Peace.CVIII. GOD'S Government, Zion's Joy. Isaiah lii.-7.1YE Subjects of the LORD, proclaimThe royal Honours of his Name;Jehovah reigns, be all your Song.'Tis he, thy GOD, O Zion, reigns,Prepare thy most harmonious StrainsGlad Hallelujahs to prolong.2Ye Princes, boast no more your Crowns,But lay the glitt'ring Trifles downIn lowly Honour at his Feet;A Span your narrow Empire bounds,He reigns beyond created Rounds,In self-sufficient Glory great.3Tremble, ye Pageants of a Day,Form'd like your Slaves of brittle Clay,Down to the Dust your Sceptres bend:To everlasting Years he reigns,And undiminish'd Pomp maintains,When Kings and Suns and Time shall end.4So shall his favour'd Zion live;In vain confed rate Nations striveHer sacred Turrets to destroy;Her Sov'reign sits enthron'd above,And endless Pow'r, and endless LoveEnsure her Safety, and her Joy.CIX. Divine Mercies and Judgments compared. Isaiah liv. 7, 8.1IN thy Rebukes, All-gracious GOD,What soft Compassion reigns!
What gentle Accents of thy VoiceAssuage thy Children's Pains!2"When I correct my chosen Sons,"A Father's Bowels move:"One transient Moment bounds my Wrath,"But endless is my Love".3Our Faith shall look thro' ev'ry Tear,And view thy smiling Face,And Hope amidst our Sighs shall tuneAn Anthem to thy Grace.4Gather at length my weary SoulTo join thy Saints above;For I would learn a Song of PraiseEternal as thy Love.CX. Divine Teachings, and their happy Consequences. Isaiah liv. 13.1BRIGHT Source of intellectual Rays,Father of Spirits, and of Grace,O dart with Energy unknownCelestial Beamings from thy Throne.2Thy sacred Book we would survey,Enlight'ned with that heav'nly Day,And ask thy Spirit, with the Word,To teach our Souls to know the LORD.3So shall our Children learn the RoadThat leads them to their Fathers GOD;And, form'd by Lessons so divine,Shall Infant Minds with Knowledge shine.4So shall the haughtiest Soul submitWith Children plac'd at Jesus Feet:The noisy Swell of Pride shall cease,And thy sweet Voice be heard in Peace.CXI. Fruitful Showers, Emblems of the salutary Effects of the Gospel. Isaiah lv. 10, 11, 12.1MARK the soft-falling Snow,And the diffusive Rain;To Heav'n, from whence it fell,It turns not back again,But waters EarthThro' ev'ry Pore,And calls forth allIts secret Store.2Array'd in beauteous GreenThe Hills and Valleys shine,And Man and Beast is fedBy Providence divine;The Harvest bowsIts golden Ears,The copious SeedOf future Years.3"So," saith the GOD of Grace,"My Gospel shall descend,"Almighty to effect"The Purpose I intend;"Millions of Souls"Shall feel its Pow'r,
"And bear it down"To Millions more.4"Joy shall begin your March,"And Peace protect your Ways,"While all the Mountains round"Eccho melodious Praise;"The vocal Groves"Shall sing the GOD,"And ev'ry Tree"Consenting nod".CXII. Comfort for pious Parents, who have been bereaved of their Children. Isaiah lvi. 4, 5.1YE mourning Saints, whose streaming TearsFlow o'er your Children dead,Say not in Transports of Despair,That all your Hopes are fled.2While cleaving to that darling Dust,In fond Distress ye lie,Rise, and with Joy and Rev'rence viewAn heav'nly Parent nigh.3Tho', your young Branches torn away,Like wither'd Trunks ye stand,With fairer Verdure shall ye bloom,Touch'd by th' Almighty's Hand.4"I'll give the Mourners, saith the LORD,"In mine own House a Place;"No Names of Daughters and of Sons"Could yield so high a Grace.5"Transient and vain is ev'ry Hope,"A rising Race can give;"In endless Honour and Delight"My Children all shall live."6We welcome, LORD, those rising Tears,Thro' which thy Face we see,And bless those Wounds, which thro' our HeartPrepare a Way for Thee.CXIII. The Stranger entertained in GOD's House of Prayer. Isaiah lvi. 6, 7. compared with Matt. xxi. 13. and Eph. ii. 19.1GREAT Father of Mankind,We bless that wond'rous Grace,Which could for Gentiles findWithin thy Courts a Place.How kind the CareOur GOD displays,For us to raiseAn House of Pray'r!2Tho' once estranged far,We now approach the Throne;For Jesus brings us near,And makes our Cause his own:Strangers no more,To thee we come,And find our Home,And rest secure.3To thee our Souls we join,And love thy sacred Name;
No more our own, but thine,We triumph in thy Claim;Our Father King,Thy Cov'nant-GraceOur Souls embrace,Thy Titles sing.4Here in thy House we feastOn Dainties all divine;And, while such Sweets we taste,With Joy our Faces shine.Incense shall riseFrom Flames of Love,And GOD approveThe Sacrifice.5May all the Nations throngTo worship in thy House;And thou attend the Song,And smile upon their Vows;Indulgent still,Till Earth conspireTo join the ChoirOn Zion's Hill.CXIV. Peace proclaimed, and the Fruit of the Lips created by a gracious GOD. Isaiah lvii. 19.1HARK! for the great Creator speaks;In Silence let the Earth attend;And when his Words of Grace are heard,In grateful Adoration bend.2"'Tis I create the Fruit of Praise,"And give the broken Heart to sing"Peace, heav'nly Peace, my Lips proclaim,"Pleas'd with the happy News they bring".3Receive the Tidings with Delight,Ye Gentile Nations from afar;And you, the Children of his Love,Whom Grace hath brought already near.4To these, to those his sov'reign HandIts healing Energy imparts:Peace, Peace be eccho'd from your Tongues,And eccho'd from consenting Hearts.5Enjoy the Health, which GOD hath wrought,Nor let the daily Tribute cease,Till chang'd for more exalted SongsIn Regions of eternal Peace.CXV. The Duty of remonstrating against Sin, when Judgments are threatned. Isaiah lviii. 1.1THY Judgments cry aloud,O ever-righteous GOD,And in the Sight of all our LandThou liftest up thy Rod.2Aloud thy Servants cry,Commission'd from thy Throne,And like a Trumpet raise their VoiceTo make thy Judgments known.3But who that Cry attends,And makes his Safety sure?
Rock'd by the Tempest, they should flee,They sleep the more secure.4Another Trumpet, LORD,The stupid Slumb'rers need;Nor will they hear a feebler VoiceThan that, which wakes the Dead.CXVI. Unsuccessful Fasts accounted for. Isaiah lviii. 3. compared with v. 4-8. For a Fast-Day.1O! Where is sov'reign Mercy gone?Whither is Britain's GOD withdrawn?That thro' long Years she should complain,She fasts, and mourns, and cries in vain?2Hast thou not seen her suppliant BandsThro' all her Coasts extend their Hands?Or has their oft-repeated Pray'rEscap'd thine ever-list'ning Ear?3Thine Ear hath heard, thine Eye hath seen;But Guilt hath spread a Cloud between;And rising still before thy Face,Averts thy long-intreated Grace.4Dispel that Cloud by Rays divine,And cause thy chearing Face to shine;Our Isle shall shout from Shore to Shore,And dread encroaching Foes no more.5Our Light shall like the Morning spring;Healing and Joy our GOD shall bring;Justice shall in our Front appear,And Glory gather up our Rear.CXVII. The Standard of the Spirit lifted up. Isaiah lix. 19.1GOD of the Ocean, at whose VoiceThe threatning Floods are heard no more,Behold their Madness and their Noise,And silence the tumultuous Roar.2Here Streams of pois'nous Error swell;There rages Vice in ev'ry Form;They join their Tide, led on by Hell,And Zion trembles at the Storm.3Almighty Spirit, raise thine Arm,And lift the Saviour's Standard high;Thy People's Hearts with Vigour warm,And call thy chosen Legions nigh.4Wak'd by thy well-known Voice they come,And round the sacred Banner throng:Zion, prepare the Conqu'ror Room,While Triumph bursts into a Song.5"The LORD on high, when Billows roar,"Superior Majesty displays,"And by one Breath of sov'reign Pow'r"Hushes the Noise of foaming Seas".CXVIII. The Glory of the Church in the latter Day. Isaiah lx. 1.1O Zion, tune thy Voice,And raise thy Hands on high;Tell all the Earth thy Joys,And boast Salvation nigh.
Chearful in GOD,Arise and shine,While Rays divineStream all abroad,2He gilds thy mourning FaceWith Beams that cannot fade;His all-resplendent GraceHe pours around thy Head;The Nations roundThy Form shall view,With Lustre newDivinely crown'd.3In Honour to his NameReflect that sacred Light;And loud that Grace proclaim,Which makes thy Darkness bright:Persue his Praise,Till sov'reign LoveIn Worlds aboveThe Glory raise.4There on his holy HillA brighter Sun shall rise,And with his Radiance fillThose fairer purer Skies;While round his ThroneTen thousand StarsIn nobler Spheres Orbs or Paths in which the Stars move.His Influence own.CXIX. GOD the everlasting Light of the Saints above. Isaiah lx. 20.1YE golden Lamps of Heav'n The Stars., farewel,With all your feeble Light:Farewel, thou ever-changing Moon,Pale Empress of the Night.2And thou refulgent Orb of Day The Sun.In brighter Flames array'd,My Soul, that springs beyond thy Sphere,No more demands thine Aid.3Ye Stars are but the shining DustOf my divine Abode,The Pavement of those heav'nly Courts,Where I shall reign with GOD.4The Father of eternal LightShall there his Beams display;Nor shall one Moment's Darkness mixWith that unvaried Day.5No more the Drops of piercing GriefShall swell into mine Eves;Nor the Meridian Noon Day. Sun declineAmidst those brighter Skies.6There all the Millions of his SaintsShall in one Song unite,And Each the Bliss of all shall viewWith infinite Delight.CXX. GOD intreated for Zion. Isaiah lxii. 6, 7.For a Fast-Day; or A Day of Prayer for the Revival of Religion.1INDULGENT Sov'reign of the Skies,And wilt thou bow thy gracious Ear?While feeble Mortals raise their Cries,Wilt thou, the great Jehovah, hear?2How shall thy Servants give thee Rest,Till Zion's mould'ring Walls thou raise?Till thine own Pow'r shall stand confess'd,And make Jerusalem a Praise?3For this, a lowly suppliant CroudHere in thy sacred Temple wait:For this, we lift our Voices loud,And call, and knock at Mercy's Gate.4Look down, O GOD, with pitying Eye,And view the Desolation round;See what wide Realms in Darkness lie,And hurl their Idols to the Ground.5Loud let the Gospel-Trumpet blow,And call the Nations from afar;Let all the Isles their Saviour know,And Earth's remotest Ends draw near.6Let Babylon's proud Altars shake,And Light invade her darkest Gloom;The Yoke of Iron-Bondage break,The Yoke of Satan, and of Rome.7With gentle Beams on Britain shine,And bless her Princes, and her Priests;And by thine Energy divineLet sacred Love o'erflow their Breasts.8Triumphant here let Jesus reign,And on his Vineyard sweetly smile;While all the Virtues of his TrainAdorn our Church, adorn our Isle.9On all our Souls let Grace descend,Like heav'nly Dew in copious Show'rs,That we may call our GOD our Friend,That we may hail Salvation ours.10Then shall each Age and Rank agreeUnited Shouts of Joy to raise;And Zion, made a Praise by Thee,To Thee shall render back the Praise.CXXI. A Nation born in a Day; or The rapid Progress of the Gospel desired. Isaiah lxvi. 8.1BEHOLD with pleasing ExtacyThe Gospel-Standard lifted high,That all the Nations from afarMay in the great Salvation share.2Why then, Almighty Saviour, whyDo wretched Souls in Millions die?While wide th' infernal Tyrant reignsO'er spacious Realms in pond'rous heavy. Chains.3And shall he still go on to boast,Thy Cross its Energy hath lost?And shall thy Servants still complain,Their Labours, and their Tears are vain?4Awake, all-conqu'ring Arm, awake,And Hell's extensive Empire shake;Assert the Honours of thy Throne,And call this ruin'd World thine own.5Thine all-successful Pow'r display;Produce a Nation in a Day;For at thy Word this barren EarthShall travail with a gen'ral Birth.6Swift let thy quick'ning Spirit breatheOn these Abodes of Sin and Death;That Breath shall bow ten thousand Minds,Like waving Corn before the Winds.7Scarce can our glowing Hearts endureA World, where thou art known no more;Transform it, LORD, by conqu'ring Love,Or bear us to the Realms above.CXXII. Backsliding Israel invited to return to GOD. Jerem. iii. 12, 13.1BACKSLIDING Israel, hear the VoiceOf thy forgiving GOD,Nor force such Goodness to exertThe Terrors of the Rod.2Thus saith the LORD, "My Mercy flows"An unexhausted Stream,
"And after all its Millions sav'd,"Its Sway is still supreme.3"One Moment's Wrath with weighty Crush"Might sink you quick to Hell;"Yet Mercy points the happy Path,"Where Life and Glory dwell.4"Own but the Follies thou hast done,"And mourn thy Sins in Dust,"And soon thy trembling Heart shall learn"To hope and love and trust".5All-gracious GOD, thy Voice we own;And, prostrate at thy Feet,Our Souls in humble Silence waitA Pardon there to meet.CXXIII. The Goodness of GOD acknowledged in giving Pastors after his own Heart. Jerem. iii. 15.At the Settlement of a Minister.1SHEPHERD of Israel, Thou dost keepWith constant Care thy humble Sheep;By thee inferior Pastors riseTo feed our Souls, and bless our Eyes.2To all thy Churches such impart,Modell'd by thine own gracious Heart;Whose Courage Watchfulness and LoveMen may attest, and GOD approve.3Fed by their active tender Care,Healthful may all thy Sheep appear,
And, by their fair Example led,The Way to Zion's Pastures tread.4Here hast thou list'ned to our Vows,And scatter'd Blessings on thy House;Thy Saints are succour'd, and no moreAs Sheep without a Guide deplore.5Compleatly heal each former Stroke,And bless the Shepherd, and the Flock;Confirm the Hopes thy Mercies raise,And own this Tribute of our Praise.CXXIV. GOD's gracious Methods of adopting Love. Jerem. iii. 19.1AMAZING Plan of sov'reign Love!And doth our GOD look downOn Rebels, whom his Wrath might doomTo perish at his Frown?2Doth he project a wond'rous SchemeIn such a Way to save,That Justice, Majesty, and GraceMay one joint Triumph have?3One Look the stubborn Hearts subdues,And at his Feet they fall;They own their Father with Delight,And he receives them all.4Number'd amongst his dearest Sons,The pleasant Land they share;On Earth secur'd by Pow'r divine,Till crown'd with Glory there.5Father, in thine Embraces lodg'dOur Heav'n begun we feel,And wait the Hour, which thou shalt markThy Counsels to fulfill.CXXV. Creatures vain, and GOD the Salvation of his People. Jerem. iii. 23.1HOW long shall Dreams of Creature-BlissOur flatt'ring Hopes employ,And mock our fond deluded EyesWith visionary Joy The Appearance of Joy.?2Why from the Mountains and the HillsIs our Salvation sought,While our eternal Rock's forsook,And Israel's GOD forgot?3The living Spring neglected flowsFull in our daily View,Yet we with anxious fruitless ToilOur broken Cisterns hew.4These fatal Errors, Gracious GOD,With gentle Pity see:To Thee our roving Eyes direct,And fix our Souls on Thee.CXXVI. Invitation to return to the LORD, and put away Abominations. Jerem. iv. 1, 2.1IT is the LORD of Glory calls,O let his Israel hear:
"Stop, ye Revolters, in your Course,"And hearken, and come near.2"What tho' in Sin's delusive Paths"Ye from your Youth have stray'd;"What tho' my Messages of Love"Have been with Scorn repay'd;3"At last return, and Grace divine"Your Wand'rings shall forget?"If loyal Zeal and Love dethrone"Each Idol from its Seat.4"Return, and dwell secure on Earth,"As in your LORD's Embrace,"Till in the Land of perfect Joy"Ye find a nobler Place".5Father of Mercies, lo, we comeSubdu'd by such a Call:O let the Hand of Grace divineReduce, and bless us all.6So will we teach the World that Love,Which we are made to see,And Wand'rers shall with us return,And bless themselves in Thee.CXXVII. Misimproved Priviledges, and disappointed Hopes. Jerem. viii. 20.1ALAS, how fast our Moments fly!How short our Months appear!How swift thro' various Seasons hastsThe still revolving Year!2Seasons of Grace, and Days of HopeWhile Jesus waiting stands,And spreads the Blessings of his LoveWith wide-extended Hands.3But O! how slow our stupid SoulsThese Blessings to secure!Blessings, which thro' eternal YearsUnwith'ring shall endure.4Beneath the Word of Life we die;We starve amidst our Store;And what Salvation should impartHeightens our Ruin more.5Pity this Madness, GOD of Love,And make us truly wise:So from the pregnant Seeds of GraceShall glorious Harvests rise.CXXVIII. Glorying in GOD alone. Jerem. ix. 23, 24.1THE righteous LORD, supremely great,Maintains his universal State;O'er all the Earth his Pow'r extends;All Heav'n before his Footstool bends.2Yet Justice still with Pow'r presides,And Mercy all his Empire guides;Such Works are pleasing in his Sight,And such the Men of his Delight.3No more, ye Wise, your Wisdom boast:No more, ye Strong, your Valour trust:
Nor let the Rich survey his Store,Elate lifted up. with Heaps of shining Ore.4Glory, my Soul, in this alone,That GOD, thy GOD, to thee is known,That thou hast own'd his sov'reign Sway,That thou hast felt his chearing Ray.5My Wisdom Wealth and Pow'r I findIn one Jehovah all combin'd;On him I fix my roving Eyes,Till all my Soul in Rapture rise.6All else, which I my Treasure call,May in one fatal Moment fall;But what his Happiness can move,Whom GOD the blessed deigns condescends. to love?CXXIX. Jeremiah's Tears over the captive Flock. Jerem. xiii. 15-17.1FLOW on, my Tears, in rising Streams,Ye briny Fountains, flow;While haughty Sinners steel their Hearts,Nor will Jehovah know.2The Flock of GOD is captive ledIn Satan's heavy Chains;Led to the Borders of the Pit,Where endless Horror reigns.3Look back, ye Captives, and invokeJehovah's saving Aid;
Give him the Glory of his Name,Whose Hand your Nature made.4O turn, e'er yet your erring FeetOn Death's dark Mountain fall;Cry, and your gentle Shepherd's EarWill hearken to your Call.5Then shall those Hearts with Pleasure springWhich now in Sorrow melt;And deep Repentance yield a JoyProud Guilt hath never felt.6Almighty Grace, exert thy Pow'r,And turn these Slaves of Sin;And, when they bring thy Tribute due,Shall their own Bliss begin.CXXX. Giving Glory to GOD, before Darkness comes upon us. Jerem. xiii. 16.1THE swift-declining Day,How fast its Moments fly!While Ev'ning's broad and gloomy ShadeGains on the western Sky.2Ye Mortals, mark its Pace,And use the Hours of Light;And know, its Maker can commandAn instantaneous sudden. Night.3His Word blots out the SunIn its meridian Blaze;
And cuts from smiling vig'rous YouthThe Remnant of its Days.4On the dark Mountain's BrowYour Feet shall quickly slide;And from its airy Summit dashYour momentary Pride.5Give Glory to the LORD,Who rules the whirling Sphere The Revolutions of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.;Submissive at his Footstool bow,And seek Salvation there.6Then shall new Lustre breakThro' Horror's darkest Gloom,And lead you to unchanging Light,In a celestial Home.CXXXI. The fatal Consequences of forsaking the Hope of Israel. Jerem. xvii. 13, 14.1GREAT Object of thine Israel's Hope,Its Saviour, and its Praise,Attend, while we to thee devoteThe Remnant of our Days.2How wretched they that leave the LORD,And from his Word withdraw,That lose his Gospel from their Sight,And wander from his Law!3O thou eternal Spring of Good,Whence living Waters flow,
Let not our thirsty erring SoulsTo broken Cisterns go.4Like Characters inscrib'd in DustAre Sinners borne away;And all the Treasures, they can boast,The Portion of a Day.5But, LORD, to Thee my Heart shall turnTo heal it, and to save;The Joys, that from thy Favour flow,Shall bloom beyond the Grave.CXXXII. CHRIST, the Lord our Righteousness. Jerem. xxiii. 6.1SAVIOUR divine, we know thy Name,And in that Name we trust;Thou art the LORD our Righteousness,Thou art thine Israel's Boast.2Guilty we plead before thy Throne,And low in Dust we lie,Till Jesus stretch his gracious ArmTo bring the guilty nigh.3The Sins of one most righteous DayMight plunge us in Despair;Yet all the Crimes of num'rous YearsShall our great Surety clear.4That spotless Robe, which he hath wrought,Shall deck us all around;Nor by the piercing Eye of GODOne Blemish shall be found.5Pardon and Peace and lively HopeTo Sinners now are giv'n;Israel and Judah soon shall changeTheir Wilderness for Heav'n.6With Joy we taste that Manna now,Thy Mercy scatters down;We seal our humble Vows to Thee,And wait the promis'd Crown.CXXXIII. The Efficacy of GOD's Word. Jerem. xxiii. 29.1WITH rev'rend Awe, tremendous LORD,We hear the Thunders of thy Word;The Pride of Lebanon it breaks:Swift the celestial Fire descends,The flinty Rock in Pieces rends,And Earth to its deep Centre shakes.2Array'd in Majesty divineHere Sanctity, and Justice shine,And Horror strikes the Rebel thro';While loud this awful Voice makes knownThe Wonders, which thy Sword hath done,And what thy Vengeance yet shall do.3So spread the Honours of thy Name;The Terrors of a GOD proclaim;Thick let the pointed Arrows fly;Till Sinners, humbled in the Dust,Shall own the Execution just,And bless the Hand by which they die.4Then clear the dark tempestuous Day,And radiant Beams of Love display;Each prostrate Soul let Mercy raise:So shall the bleeding Captives feel'Thy Word, which gave the Wound, can heal,And change their Groans to Songs of Praise.CXXXIV. The Possibility of dying this Year. Jerem. xxviii. -16-. For New-Year's Day.1GOD of my Life, thy constant CareWith Blessings crowns each op'ning Year;This guilty Life dost thou prolong,And wake anew mine annual Song.2How many precious Souls are fledTo the vast Regions of the Dead,Since from this Day the changing SunThro' his last yearly Period run?3We yet survive; but who can sayOr thro' the Year, or Month, or Day,I will retain this vital Breath;Thus far at least in League with Death?4That Breath is thine, Eternal GOD;'Tis thine to fix my Soul's Abode;It holds its Life from thee alone,On Earth, or in the World unknown.5To thee our Spirits we resign;Make them and own them still as thine;
So shall they smile, secure from Fear,Tho' Death should blast the rising Year.6Thy Children, eager to be gone,Bid Time's impetuous Tide roll on,And land them on that blooming Shore,Where Years and Death are known no more.CXXXV. GOD's Complacency in his Thoughts of Peace towards his People. Jerem. xxix. 11.1VILER than Dust, O LORD, are we;And doth thine Anger cease?And doth thy gracious Heart o'erflowWith Purposes of Peace?2And dost thou with Delight reflectOn what thy Grace shall do?And with Complacency of SoulEnjoy the distant View?3And can thine often-injur'd LoveSo kind a Message send,That thou to all our length'ned WoesWilt give th' expected End?4Why droop our Hearts? Why flow our Eyes,While such a Voice we hear?Why rise our Sorrows and our Fears,While such a Friend is near?5To all thine other Favours addA Heart to trust thy Word,And Death itself shall hear us sing,While resting on the LORD.CXXXVI. The impudent Rebellion of the Jewish Refugees at Pathros. Jer. xliv. 16, 17, 28.1WHOSE Words against the LORD are stout?Or who presume to say,"That sov'reign Law, which GOD proclaims,"I dare to disobey"?2Ten thousand Actions ev'ry whereThe impious Language speak;Yet Pow'r omnipotent stands by,Nor do its Thunders break.3But O! the dreadful Day draws near,When GOD'S avenging HandShall shew, if feeble Mortals Breath,Or GOD'S own Word shall stand.4My Soul, with prostrate Rev'rence fallBefore the Voice divine;And all thine Int'rest, and thy Pow'rsTo its Command resign.5Speak, mighty Lord; thy Servant waitsThe Purport of thy Will:My Heart with secret Ardour glowsIts Mandates Commands. to fulfill.6Let the vain Sons of Belial boast,Their Tongues and Thoughts are free;My noblest Liberty I own,When subject most to Thee.CXXXVII. Asking the Way to Zion, in order to joining in Covenant with GOD. Jerem. l. 5.1ENQUIRE, ye Pilgrims, for the Way,That leads to Zion's Hill,And thither set your steady FaceWith a determin'd Will.2Invite the Strangers all aroundYour pious March to join;And spread the Sentiments you feelOf Faith and Love divine.3Come, let us to his Temple haste,And seek his Favour there,Before his Footstool humbly bow,And pour our servent Pray'r.4Come, let us join our Souls to GODIn everlasting Bands,And seize the Blessings he bestowsWith eager Hearts and Hands.5Come, let us seal without DelayThe Cov'nant of his Grace;Nor shall the Years of distant LifeIts Memory efface.6Thus may our rising Offspring hasteTo seek their Fathers GOD,Nor e'er forsake the happy PathTheir youthful Feet have trod.CXXXVIII. Searching and trying our Ways. Lament. iii. 40.1THY piercing Eye, O GOD, surveysThe various Windings of our Ways;Teach us their Tendency to know,And judge the Paths in which we go.2How wild, how crooked have they been!A Maze of Foolishness and Sin!With all the Light we vainly boast,Leaving our Guide, our Souls are lost.3Had not thy Mercy been our AidSo fatally our Feet had stray'd,Stern Justice had its Pris'ners ledDown to the Chambers of the Dead.4O turn us back to Thee again,Or we shall search our Ways in vain;Shine, and the Path of Life reveal,And bear us on to Zion's Hill.5Roll on, ye swift-revolving Years,And end this Round of Sins and CaresNo more a Wand'rer would I roam,But near my Father fix at Home.CXXXIX. The Breath of our Nostrils taken in the Pits of the Enemy, applied to CHRIST. Lament. iv. 20.1BLEST Saviour, to my Heart more dearThan balmy Gales of vital Air,
Were thy Soul-chearing Presence gone,What Use of Breath, unless to groan?2Thy Father's royal Hand hath shedIn rich Profusion on thy HeadTen thousand Graces; Thou aloneCanst share, and canst adorn his Throne.3But see the Sov'reign captive led,Snar'd in the Pit, which Traitors made,Fetter'd with ignominious Bands,And murder'd by rebellious Hands.4Ye Saints, to your expiring KingYour tributary Sorrows bring:In loyal Crowds assemble round,And bathe in Tears each precious Wound.5But from the Caverns of the GraveHe springs, omnipotent to save;The captive King ascends and reigns,And drags his conqu'red Foes in Chains.6Beneath his Shade our Souls shall liveIn all the Rapture Heav'n can give;Where Zion never shall deplore,And Heathens vex his Church no more.CXL. Of lamenting national Sins. Ezek. ix. 4-6. For a Fast-Day.1O Righteous GOD, thou Judge supreme,We tremble at thy dreadful Name,And all our crying Guilt we ownIn Dust and Tears before thy Throne.2So manifold our Crimes have been,Such Crimson Tincture dyes our Sin,That, could we all its Horrors know,Our streaming Eyes with Blood might flow.3Britain, the Land thine Arm hath sav'd,That Arm most impiously hath brav'd defied.;Britain, the Isle its GOD hath lov'd,A Rebel to that Love hath prov'd.4Estrang'd from reverential AweWe trample on thy sacred Law;And, tho' such Wonders Grace hath done,Anew we crucify thy Son.5Justly might this polluted LandProve all the Vengeance of thy Hand;And bath'd in Heav'n thy Sword might comeTo drink our Blood, and seal our Doom.6Yet hast thou not a Remnant here,Whose Souls are fill'd with pious Fear?O bring thy wonted Mercy nigh,While prostrate at thy Feet they lie.7Behold their Tears, attend their Moan,Nor turn away their secret Groan:With these we join our humble Pray'r;Our Nation shield, our Country spare.8But if the Sentence be decreed,And our dear native Land must bleed,By thy sure Mark may we be known,And save in Life or Death Thine own.CXLI. The Iniquity of sacrificing GOD's Children; or The Evil of a bad or neglected Education. Ezek. xvi. 20, 21 Alluding to the cruel Custom among some Heathens of sacrificing their Children to their Gods, to which there are frequent References in Scripture..1BEHOLD, O Israel's GOD,From thine exalted Throne,And view the desolate Abode,Thou once hast call'd thine own.2The Children of thy Flock,By early Cov'nant thine,See how they pour their bleeding SoulsOn ev'ry Idol's Shrine Altar.!3To Indolence and PrideWhat piteous Victims made!Crush'd in their Parents fond Embrace,And by their Care betray'd.4By Pleasure's polish'd DartWhat Numbers here are slain!What Numbers there for Slaughter boundIn Mammon's golden Chain!5O let thine Arm awake,And dash the Idols down!O call the Captives of their Pow'rThy Treasure, and thy Crown.6Thee let the Fathers own,And Thee the Sons adore,
Join'd to the Lord by solemn VowsTo be forgot no more.CXLII. The Humility and Submission of a Penitent. Ezek. xvi. 63.1O Injur'd Majesty of Heav'n,Look from thy holy Throne,While prostrate Rebels own with GriefWhat Treasons they have done.2Thy Grace, where Sin abounded most,Reigns with superior Sway;And Pardons bought with Jesus' BloodTo Rebels doth display.3While Love its grateful Anthems tunes,Tears mingle with the Song;My Heart with tender Anguish bleeds,That I such Grace should wrong.4How shall I lift these guilty EyesTo mine offended Lord?Or how, beneath his heaviest Strokes,Pronounce one murm'ring Word?5Remorse and Shame my Lips have seal'd;But O! my Father, speak;And all the Harmony of Heav'nShall thro' the Silence break.CXLIII. GOD bringing his People into the Covenant under the Rod. Ezek. xx. 37.1HOW gracious and how wiseIs our chastising GOD!
And O! how rich the Blessings are,Which blossom from his Rod!2He lifts it up on highWith Pity in his Heart,That ev'ry Stroke his Children feelMay Grace and Peace impart.3Instructed thus they bow,And own his sov'reign Sway;They turn their erring Foctsteps backTo his forsaken Way.4His Cov'nant-Love they seek,And seek the happy Bands,That closer still engage their HeartsTo honour his Commands.5Dear Father, we consentTo Discipline divine;And bless the Pains, that make our SoulsStill more compleatly thine.CXLIV. GOD's Condescension in becoming the Shepherd of Men. Ezek. xxxiv. 31.1AND will the Majesty of Heav'nAccept us for his Sheep?And with a Shepherd's tender CareSuch worthless Creatures keep?2And will he spread his guardian ArmsRound our defenceless Head?And cause us gently to lie downIn his refreshing Shade?3And will he lead our weary SoulsTo that delightful Scene,Where Rivers of Salvation flowThro' Pastures ever green?4What Thanks can mortal Men repayFor Favours great as Thine?Or how can Tongues of feeble ClayProclaim such Love divine?5Eternal GOD, how mean are we!How richly gracious Thou!Our Souls, o'erwhelm'd with humble Joy,In silent Transports bow.CXLV. Seeking to GOD for the Communication of his Spirit. Ezek. xxxvi. 37.1HEar, gracious Sov'reign, from thy Throne,And send thy various Blessings down:While by thine Israel Thou art sought,Attend the Pray'r thy Word hath taught.2Come, Sacred Spirit, from above,And fill the coldest Heart with Love;Soften to Flesh the rugged Stone,And let thy godlike Pow'r be known.3Speak thou, and from the haughtiest EyesShall Floods of pious Sorrow rise;While all their glowing Souls are borneTo seek that Grace, which now they scorn:4O let a holy Flock awaitNum'rous around thy Temple-Gate,
Each pressing on with Zeal to beA living Sacrifice to Thee.5In Answer to our servent Cries,Give us to see thy Church arise;Or, if that Blessing seem too great,Give us to mourn its low Estate.CXLVI. Ezekiel's Vision of the dry Bones, Ezek. xxxvii. 3.1LOOK down, O LORD, with pitying Eye;See Adam's Race in Ruin lie;Sin spreads its Trophies o'er the Ground,And scatters slaughter'd Heaps around.2And can these mould'ring Corpses live?And can these perish'd Bones revive?That, Mighty GOD, to Thee is known;That wond'rous Work is all thine own.3Thy Ministers are sent in vainTo prophesy upon the Slain;In vain they call, in vain they cry,Till thine almighty Aid is nigh.4But if thy Spirit deign to breathe,Life spreads thro' all the Realms of Death;Dry Bones obey thy pow'rful Voice;They move, they waken, they rejoice.5So when thy Trumpet's awful SoundShall shake the Heav'ns, and rend the Ground,Dead Saints shall from their Tombs arise,And spring to Life beyond the Skies.CXLVII. The Waters of the Sanctuary healing the dead Sea The Sea or Lake, where Sodom, Gomorrah, &c. had stood, which was putrid and poysonous; and ancient Writers say, that no Fish could live in it.. Ezek. xlvii. 8, 9.1GREAT Source of Being and of Love,Thou wat'rest all the Worlds above,And all the Joys we Mortals knowFrom thine exhaustless Fountain flow.2A sacred Spring at thy CommandFrom Zion's Mount, in Canaan's Land,Beside thy Temple, cleaves the Ground,And pours its limpid Stream around.3The limpid Stream with sudden ForceSwells to a River in its Course;Thro' desart Realms its Windings play,And scatter Blessings all the Way.4Close by its Banks in Order fairThe blooming Trees of Life appear;Their Blossoms fragrant Odours give,And on their Fruit the Nations live.5To the dead Sea the Waters flow,And carry Healing as they go;Its poys'nous Dregs their Pow'r confess,And all its Shores the Fountain bless.6Flow, wond'rous Stream with Glory crown'd,Flow on to Earth's remotest Bound;And bear us on thy gentle WaveTo him, who all thy Virtues gave.CXLVIII. TEKEL; or The Sinner weighed in GOD's Balances, and found wanting. Daniel v. 27.1RAISE, thoughtless Sinner, raise thine Eye;Behold GOD's Balance lifted high;There shall his Justice be display'd,And there thy Hope and Life be weigh'd.2See in one Scale his perfect Law;Mark with what Force its Precepts draw:Wouldst thou the awful Test sustain,Thy Works how light! thy Thoughts how vain!3Behold the Hand of GOD appearsTo trace these dreadful Characters;"Tekel, thy Soul is wanting found,"And Wrath shall smite thee to the Ground".4Let sudden Fear thy Nerves unbrace;Let Horror shake thy tott'ring Knees Compare Verse 6.;Thro' all thy Thoughts let Anguish roll,And deep Repentance melt thy Soul.5One only Hope may yet prevail;Christ hath a Weight to turn the Scale;Still doth the Gospel publish Peace,And shew a Saviour's Righteousness.6Great GOD, exert thy Pow'r to save;Deep on the Heart these Truths engrave;The pond'rous Load of Guilt remove,That trembling Lips may sing thy Love.CXLIX. The Backslider recollecting himself in his Afflictions. Hosea ii. 6, 7.1THE LORD, how kind are all his Ways,When most they seem severe!He frowns, and scourges, and rebukes,That we may learn his Fear.2With Thorns he fences up our Path,And builds a Wall around,To guard us from the Death, that lurksIn Sin's forbidden Ground.3When other Lovers, sought in vain,Our fond Address despise,He opens his indulgent ArmsWith Pity in his Eyes.4Return, ye wand'ring Souls, return,And seek his tender Breast;Call back the Mem'ry of the Days,When there you found your Rest.5Behold, O LORD, we fly to Thee,Tho' Blushes veil our Face,Constrain'd our last Retreat to seekIn thy much-injur'd Grace.CL. The Advantages of seeking the Knowledge of GOD. Hosea vi. 3.1SHINE forth, Eternal Source Fountain or Original. of Light,And make thy Glories known;
Fill our enlarg'd adoring SightWith Lustre all thine own.2Vain are the Charms, and faint the RaysThe brightest Creatures boast;And all their Grandeur, and their PraiseIs in thy Presence lost.3To know the Author of our FrameIs our sublimest Skill:True Science is to read thy Name,True Life t' obey thy Will.4For this I long, for this I pray,And foll'wing on persue,Till Visions of eternal DayFix and compleat the View.CLI. Inconstancy in Religion. Hosea vi. 4.1PERPETUAL Source of Light and Grace,We hail thy sacred Name:Through ev'ry Year's revolving RoundThy Goodness is the same.2On us, all-worthless as we are,It wond'rous Mercy pours;Sure as the Heav'ns establish'd Course,And plenteous as the Show'rs.3Inconstant Service we repay,And treach'rous Vows renew;False as the Morning's scatt'ring Cloud,And transient as the Dew.4In flowing Tears our Guilt we mourn,And loud implore thy Grace
To bear our feeble Footsteps onIn all thy righteous Ways.5Arm'd with this Energy divineOur Souls shall stedfast move,And with increasing Transport pressOn to thy Courts above.6So by thy Pow'r the Morning SunPersues his radiant Way,Brightens each Moment in his Race,And shines to perfect Day.CLII. Gratitude the Spring of true Religion. Hosea xi. 4.1MY GOD, what silken Cords are thine!How soft, and yet how strong!While Pow'r and Truth and Love combineTo draw our Souls along.2Thou saw'st us crush'd beneath the YokeOf Satan and of Sin:Thy Hand the Iron-Bondage brokeOur worthless Hearts to win.3The Guilt of twice ten thousand SinsOne Moment takes away;And Grace, when first the War begins,Secures the crowning Day.4Comfort thro' all this Vale of TearsIn rich Profusion flows,And Glory of unnumber'd YearsEternity bestows.5Drawn by such Cords we onward move,Till round thy Throne we meet;And, Captives in the Chains of Love,Embrace our Conqu'ror's Feet.CLIII. The Relentings of GOD's Heart over his backsliding People. Hosea xi. 7, 8, 9.1YE Sinners on Backsliding bent,GOD'S gracious Call attend;Shall not Compassion so divineEach stubborn Spirit bend?2"How shall I give mine Israel up"To Ruin and Despair?"How pour down Show'rs of flaming Wrath,"And make a Sodom there?3"My Bowels strong Relentings feel;"My Heart is pain'd within:"I will not all my Wrath exert,"Nor visit all their Sin.4"The Mercy of a GOD restrains"The Thunders of his Hand:"Come, seek Protection from that Pow'r,"Which you can ne'er withstand'.5With trembling Haste, O GOD, to TheeLet Sinners wing their Flight;As Doves, when Birds of Prey presue,Down on their Windows light.6Father, we seek thy gracious Arm,All melted at thy Voice:
O may thy Heart, that feels our Woes,In our Return rejoice.CLIV. GOD's Controversy by Fire. Amos iv. 11. On Occasion of a dreadful Fire.1ETERNAL GOD, our humbled SoulsBefore thy Presence bow:With all thy Magazines of Wrath,How terrible art Thou!2Fan'd by thy Breath whole Sheets of FlameDo like a Deluge pour;And all our Confidence of WealthLies mould'red in an Hour.3Led on by Thee in horrid PompDestruction rears its Head;And black'ned Walls, and smoking HeapsThro' all the Street are spread.4LORD, in the Dust we lay us down,And mourn thy righteous Ire Anger.;Yet bless the Hand of guardian Love,That snatch'd us from the Fire.5O that the hateful Dregs of SinLike Dross had perish'd there,That in fair Lines our purged SoulsMight thy bright Image bear.6So shall we view with dauntless EyesThe last tremendous Day,When Earth and Seas, and Stars and SkiesIn Flames shall melt away.CLV. Britain unreformed by remarkable Deliverances. Amos iv. 11. For a Fast-Day.1YES, Britain seem'd to Ruin doom'd,Just like a burning Brand;Till snatch'd from fierce surrounding FlamesBy GOD'S indulgent Hand.2"Once more (he says) I will suppress"The Wrath, that Sin would wake;"Once more my Patience shall attend,"And call my Britain back".3But who this Clemency reveres?Or feels this melting Grace?Who stirs his languid Spirit upTo seek thine awful Face?4On Days like these we pour our Cries,And at thy Feet we mourn;Then rise to tempt thy Wrath again,And to our Sins return.5Our Nation far from GOD remains,Far, as in distant Years;And the small Remnant, that is found,A dying Aspect wears.6Chast'ned and rescu'd thus in vain,Thy righteous Hand severeInto the Flames might hurl us back,And quite consume us there.7So by the Light our Burning givesMight neighb'ring Nations read,How terrible thy Judgments are,And learn our Guilt to dread.8Yet, 'midst the Cry of Sins like ours,Incline thy gracious Ear;And thine own Children's feeble CryWith soft Compassion hear.9O by thy sacred Spirit's BreathKindle a holy Flame;Refine the Land, thou might'st destroy,And magnify thy Name.CLVI. Preparing to meet GOD. Amos iv. 12, 13.1HE comes, thy GOD, O Israel, comes;Prepare thy GOD to meet:Meet him in Battle's Force array'd,Or humbled at his Feet.2He form'd the Mountains by his Strength;He makes the Winds to blow;And all the secret Thoughts of ManMust his Creator know.3He shades the Morning's op'ning Rays;He shakes the solid World;And Stars and Angels from their SeatsAre by his Thunder hurl'd.4Eternal Sov'reign of the Skies,And shall thine Israel dareIn mad Rebellion to arise,And tempt th' unequal War?5Lo, Nations tremble at thy Frown,And faint beneath thy Rod;Crush'd by its gentlest Movement down,They fall, Tremendous GOD.6Avert the Terrors of thy Wrath,And let thy Mercy shine;While humble Penitence and Pray'rApprove us truly thine.CLVII. Jonah's Faith recommended. Jonah ii. 4.1LORD, we have broke thy holy Laws,And slighted all thy Grace;And justly thy vindictive WrathMight cast us from thy Face.2Yet while such Precedents appearMark'd in thy sacred Book,We from these Depths of Guilt and FearWill to thy Temple look.3To Thee, in our Redeemer's Name,We raise our humble Cries;May these our Pray'rs, perfum'd by him,Like grateful Incense rise.4O never may our hopeless EyesAn absent GOD deplore,Where the dear Temples of thy LoveShall stand reveal'd no more.5Far from those Regions of DespairAppoint our Souls a Place;Where not a Frown thro' endless YearsShall veil thy lovely Face.CLVIII. GOD's Controversy with Britain stated and pleaded. Micah vi. 1, 2, 3.For a Fast-Day.1LISTEN, ye Hills; ye Mountains, hear;Jehovah vindicates his Laws:Trembling in Silence at his Bar,Thou Earth, attend thy Maker's Cause.2Israel appear; present thy Plea;And charge th Almighty to his Face;Say, if his Rules oppressive be;Say, if defective be his Grace.3Eternal Judge, the Action cease;Our Lips are seal'd in conscious Shame;'Tis ours, in Sackcloth to confess,And thine, the Sentence to proclaim.4Ten thousand Witnesses arise,Thy Mercies, and our Crimes appearMore than the Stars that deck the Skies,And all our dreadful Guilt declare.5How shall we come before thy Face,And in thine awful Presence bow?What Offers can secure thy Grace,Or calm the Terrors of thy Brow?6Thousands of Rams in vain might bleed;Rivers of Oil might blaze in vain;Or the First-born's devoted HeadWith horrid Gore thine Altar stain.7But thine own Lamb, All-gracious GOD,Whom impious Sinners dar'd to slay,
Hath sov'reign Virtue in his BloodTo purge the Nation's Guilt away.8With humble Faith to that we fly;With that be Britain sprinkled o'cr;Trembling no more in Dust we lie,And dread thy Hand and Bar no more.CLIX. Hearing the Voice of GOD's Rod. Micah vi. 9.1ATTEND, my Soul, with rev'rend AweThe Dictates of thy GOD;Silent and trembling hear the VoiceOf his appointed Rod.2Now let me search and try my Ways,And prostrate seek his Face,Conscious of Guilt before his ThroneIn Dust my Soul abase.3Teach me, my GOD, what's yet unknown,And all my Crimes forgive;Those Crimes would I no more repeat,But to thy Honour live.4My wither'd Joys too plainly shew,That all on Earth is vain;In GOD my wounded Heart confidesTrue Rest and Bliss to gain.5Father, I wait thy gracious Call,To leave this mournful Land,And bathe in Rivers of Delight,That flow at thy right Hand.CLX. GOD's incomparable Mercy admired. Micah vii. 18, 19, 20.1SUPREME in Mercy, who shall dareWith thy Compassion to compare?For thine own Sake wilt thou forgive,And bid the trembling Sinner live.2Millions of our Transgressions pastCancell'd behind thy Back are cast;Thy Grace, a Sea without a Shore,O'erflows them, and they rise no more.3And lest new Legions should invade,And make the pardon'd Soul afraid,Our inbred Lusts thou wilt subdue,And form degen'rate Hearts anew.4Our Leader GOD, our Songs proclaim;We lift our Banners in his Name;With Songs of Triumph forth we go,And level the gigantick Foe.5His Truth to Jacob shall prevail;His Oath to Abram cannot fail;The Hope of Saints in ancient Days,Which Ages yet unborn shall praise.CLXI. The impoverished Saint rejoicing in GOD. Habakkuk iii. 17, 18.1SO firm the Saint's Foundations stand,Nor can his Hopes remove;Sustain'd by GOD'S almighty Hand,And shelter'd in his Love.2Fig-Trees and Olive-Pnts may fail,And Vines their Fruit deny,Famine thro' all his Fields prevail,And Flocks and Herds may die.3GOD is the Treasure of his Soul,A Source of sacred Joy,Which no Afflictions can controul,Nor Death itself destroy.4LORD, may we feel thy chearing Beams,And taste thy Saints Repose;We will not mourn the perish'd Streams,While such a Fountain flows.CLXII. GOD's afflicted Poor trusting in his Name. Zephaniah iii. 12.1PRAISE to the Sov'reign of the Sky,Who from his lofty ThroneLooks down on all that humble lie,And calls such Souls his own.2The haughty Sinner he disdains,Tho' Gems his Temples crown;And from the Seat of Pomp and PrideHis Vengeance hurls him down.3On his afflicted pious PoorHe makes his Face to shine;He fills their Cottages of ClayWith Lustre all divine.4Among the meanest of thy FlockThere let my Dwelling be,Rather than under gilded Roofs,If absent, LORD, from Thee.5Poor and afflicted tho' we are,In thy strong Name we trust;And bless the Hand of sov'reign Love,Which lifts us from the Dust.CLXIII. GOD comforting and rejoicing over Zion. Zeph. iii. 16, 17.1YES, 'tis the Voice of Love divine!And O! how sweet the Accents sound!Afflicted Zion, rise and shine,Fair Mourner, prostrate on the Ground.2The mighty GOD, thy glorious King,Tender to pity, strong to save,Hath sworn he will Salvation bring,Tho' Sorrow press thee to the Grave.3He all a Father's Pleasure knowsTo fold thee in his dear Embrace;His Heart with secret Joy o'erflows,And chearful Smiles adorn his Face.4At length the inward ExtacyIn heav'nly Musick breaks its Way See the marginal Reading.;Jehovah leads the Harmony,And Angels teach their Harps the Lay Song..5Fain would my Lips the Chorus Company of Singers. join,And tell the list'ning World my Joys,But Condescension so divineIn Silence swallows up my Voice.CLXIV. Practical Reflections on the State of our Fathers. Zechariah i. 5.1HOW swift the Torrent rolls,That bears us to the Sea!The Tide, that bears our thoughtless SoulsTo vast Eternity!2Our Fathers, where are they,With all they call'd their own?Their Joys and Griefs, and Hopes and Cares,And Wealth and Honour gone.3But Joy or Grief succeedsBeyond our mortal Thought,While the poor Remnant of their DustLies in the Grave forgot.4There, where the Fathers lie,Must all the Children dwell;Nor other Heritage possessBut such a gloomy Cell.5GOD of our Fathers, hear,Thou everlasting Friend!While we, as on Life's utmost Verge Edge or Border.,Our Souls to Thee commend.6Of all the pious DeadMay we the Footsteps trace,Till with them in the Land of LightWe dwell before thy Face.CLXV. Joshua the High-Priest's Change of Raiment, applied to Christian Priviledges. Zech. iii. 4.1ETERNAL King, thy Robes are whiteIn spotless Rays of heav'nly Light;Adoring Angels round are seen,Yet in thy Presence are not clean.2When then are we, the Sons of Earth,That draw Pollution from our Birth?Our fleshly Garments, LORD, how mean!O'erspread with hateful Spots of Sin.3Hail to that condescending Grace,Which shews a Saviour's Righteousness!Eternal Honours to that Name,Which covers all our Guilt and Shame!4His Blood, an overflowing Sea,Shall purge our deepest Stains away:Our Souls, renew'd by Grace divine,Shall in their LORD'S Resemblance shine.5Yet, while these Rags of Flesh we wear,Pollution will again appear.Come, Death, and ease me of the Load:Come, Death, and bear my Soul to GOD.6The King of Heav'n will there bestowA richer Robe, than Monarchs know,Dress all his Saints in glitt'ring White;Not Joshua's Mitre shone so bright.7The Grave its Trophies shall resign;Christ will the mould'ring Dust refine;
And Death, the last of Foes, shall beSwallow'd and lost in Victory.8My Faith, on tow'ring Pinions borne,Anticipates that glorious Morn;And with celestial Raptures strong,Gives mortal Lips th' immortal Song.CLXVI. Joshua the High-Priest's Zeal and Fidelity rewarded with a Station among the Angels. Zech. iii. 6, 7.For the Ordination of a Minister.1GREAT LORD of Angels, we adoreThe Grace, that builds thy Courts below;And thro' ten thousand Sons of LightStoops to regard what Mortals do.2Amidst the Wastes of Time and DeathSuccessive Pastors thou dost raiseThy Charge to keep, thy House to guide,And form a People for thy Praise.3The heav'nly Natives with DelightHover around the sacred Place;Nor scorn to learn from mortal TonguesThe Wonders of redeeming Grace.4At length, dismiss'd from feeble Clay,Thy Servants join th' angelick Band;With them thro' distant Worlds they fly,With them before thy Presence stand.5O glorious Hope! O blest Employ!Sweet Lenitive what easeth or asswageth. of Grief and Care!
When shall we reach those radiant Courts,And all their Joy and Honour share?6Yet while these Labours we persue,Thus distant from thy heav'nly Throne,Give us a Zeal and Love like their's,And half their Heav'n shall here be known.CLXVII. The compleating of the spiritual Temple. Zech. iv. 7.1SING to the LORD above,Who deigns on Earth to raiseA Temple to his Love,A Monument of Praise.Ye Saints around,Thro' all its Frame,Its Builder's NameHarmonious sound.2He form'd the glorious Plan,And its Foundation laid,That GOD might dwell with Man,And Mercy be display'd;His Son he sent,Who, great and good,Made his own BloodThe sweet Cement.3Beneath his Eye and CareThe Edifice shall riseMajestick strong and fair,And shine above the Skies.
There shall he placeThe polish'd Stone,Ordain'd to crownThis Work of Grace.CLXVIII. The Error of despising the Day of small Things. Zech. iv. 10-.1"WHat haughty Scorner, saith the Lord,"Shall humble Things despise,"When he beholds them with Delight,"Who reigns beyond the Skies?2"I from a Chaos dark and wild Genesis i. 2, 3."Made Heav'ns bright Host appear:"I from the small unnotic'd Seeds"The loftiest Cedars rear.3"From Eden's Dust I Adam form'd,"The noblest human Frame;"And in his humble Sons display"The Honours of my Name.4"From Fishermen, in Number few,"In human Arts untaught,"All the wide Realms, my Church can boast,"My potent Hand hath brought.5"The pious Poor, by Men despis'd,"In dearest Bonds are mine;"Once hardly drest in humble Weeds Garments.,"They now like Angels shine".6LORD, if such Trophies rais'd from DustThy sov'reign Glory be,
Here in my Heart thy Pow'r may findMaterials fit for Thee.CLXIX. Prisoners delivered from the Pit by the Blood of the Covenant. Zech. ix. 11.1YE Pris'ners, who in Bondage lie,In Darkness and the Pit,Behold the Grace that sets us free,And to that Grace submit.2The Tidings of Deliv'rance hear,Confess the Cov'nant good,And bless the Ransom GOD hath foundIn our Emanuel's Blood.3Justice no more asserts its ClaimYour forseit Lives to take;But smiling Mercy quick descendsYour heavy Chains to break.4We walk at large, and sing the Hand,To which we Freedom owe;And drink those Rivers with Delight,Which thro' this Desart flow.5He, that hath Liberty bestow'd,Will give a Kingdom too;He, that hath loos'd the Bonds of Death,The Path of Life will show.CLXX. The Fountain of Life. Zech. xiii. 1.1HAIL, everlasting Spring!Celestial Fountain, hail!
Thy Streams Salvation bring,The Waters never fail:Still they endure,And still they flowFor all our WoeA sov'reign Cure.2Blest be his wounded Side,And blest his bleeding Heart,Who all in Anguish diedSuch Favours to impart.His sacred BloodShall make us cleanFrom ev'ry Sin,And fit for GOD.3To that dear Source of LoveOur Souls this Day would come;And thither from above,LORD, call the Nations home;That Jew and GreekWith rapt'rous SongsOn all their TonguesThey Praise may speak.CLXXI. GOD's Name profaned, when his Table is treated with Contempt. Malachi. i. 12.Applied to the Lord's Supper.1MY GOD, and is thy Table spread?And does thy Cup with Love o'erflow?Thither be all thy Children ledAnd let them all its Sweetness know.2Hail sacred Feast, which Jesus makes!Rich Banquet of his Flesh and Blood!Thrice happy he, who here partakesThat sacred Stream, that heav'nly Food!3Why are its Dainties all in vainBefore unwilling Hearts display'd?Was not for you the Victim slain?Are you forbid the Children's Bread?4O let thy Table honour'd be,And furnish'd well with joyful Guests;And may each Soul Salvation see,That here its sacred Pledges tastes.5Let Crouds approach with Hearts prepar'd;With Hearts inflam'd let all attend;Nor, when we leave our Father's Board,The Pleasure, or the Profit end.6Revive thy dying Churches, LORD,And bid our drooping Graces live;And more that Energy afford,A Saviour's Blood alone can give.CLXXII. GOD's gracious Regard to active Attempts to revive Religion. Mal. iii. 16, 17.1THE LORD on mortal Worms looks downFrom his celestial Throne;And, when the Wicked swarm around,He well discerns his own.2He sees the tender Hearts, that mournThe Scandals of the Times;
And join their Efforts to opposeThe wide-prevailing Crimes.3Low to the social Band he bowsHis still-attentive Ear;And, while his Angels sing around,Delights their Voice to hear.4The Chronicles of Heav'n shall keepTheir Words in Transcript fair;In the Redeemer's Book of LifeTheir Names recorded are.5"Yes, (saith the Lord) the World shall know"These humble Souls are mine:"These, when my Jewels I produce,"Shall in full Lustre shine.6"When Deluges of fiery Wrath"My Foes away shall bear,"That Hand, which strikes the Wicked thro',"Shall all my Children spare".CLXXIII. CHRIST the Sun of Righteousness. Malachi iv. 2.1TO Thee, O GOD, we Homage pay,Source of the Light that rules the Day;Who, while he gilds all Nature's Frame,Reflects thy Rays, and speaks thy Name.2In louder Strains we sing that Grace,Which gives the Sun of Righteousness;Whose nobler Light Salvation brings,And scatters Healing from his Wings.3Still on our Hearts may Jesus shineWith Beams of Light and Love divine;Quick'ned by him our Souls shall live,And chear'd by him shall grow and thrive.4O may his Glories stand confess'dFrom North to South, from East to West:Successful may his Gospel runWide as the Circuit of the Sun.5When shall that radiant Scene arise,When, fix'd on high in purer Skies,Christ all his Lustre shall displayOn all his Saints thro' endless Day?HYMNS From PASSAGES in the NEW TESTAMENT.HYMN CLXXIV. The Ax laid to the Root of unfruitful Trees, Matthew iii. 10.1THE LORD into his Vineyard comesOur various Fruit to see;His Eye, more piercing than the Light,Examines ev'ry Tree.2Tremble, ye Sinners, at his Frown,If barren still ye stand;And fear that keenly-wounding Ax,Which arms his awful Hand.3Close to the Root behold it laidTo make Destruction sure:Who can resist the mighty Stroke?Or who the Fire endure?4LORD, we adore thy sparing Love,Thy long-expecting Grace;Else had we low in Ruin fall'n,And known no more our Place.5Succeeding Years thy Patience waits;Nor let it wait in vain;But form in us abundant Fruit,And still this Fruit maintain.CLXXV. The Light of good Examples, the most effectual Way to glorify GOD. Matt. v. 16.1GREAT Teacher of thy Church, we ownThy Precepts all divinely wise:O may thy mighty Pow'r be shownTo fix them still before our Eyes.2Deep on our Hearts thy Law engrave,And fill our Breasts with heav'nly Zeal,That, while we trust thy Pow'r to save,We may that sacred Law fulfill.3Adorn'd with ev'ry heav'nly GraceMay our Examples brightly shine,And the sweet Lustre of thy FaceReflected beam from each of Thine.4These Lineaments Features., divinely fair,Our heav'nly Father shall proclaim;And Men, that view his Image there,Shall join to glorify his Name.CLXXVI. Providential Bounties surveyed and improved. Matthew v. 45.1FAther of Lights, we sing thy Name,Who kindlest up the Lamp of Day the Sun.;Wide as he spreads his golden Flame,His Beams thy Pow'r and Love display.2Fountain of Good, from Thee proceedThe copious Drops of genial making fruitful. Rain;Which thro' the Hills, and thro' the MeadsRevive the Grass, and swell the Grain.3Thro' the wide World thy Bounties spread;Yet Millions of our guilty Race,Tho' by thy daily Bounty fed,Affront thy Law, and spurn thy Grace.4Not so may our forgetful HeartsO'erlook the Tokens of thy Care;But what thy lib'ral Hand impartsStill own in Praise, still ask in Pray'r.5So shall our Suns more grateful shine,And Show'rs in sweeter Drops shall fall,When all our Hearts and Lives are Thine,And Thou, our GOD, enjoy'd in all.6Jesus, our brighter Sun, arise;In plenteous Show'rs thy Spirit send;Earth then shall grow a Paradise,And in the heav'nly Eden end.CLXXVII. Secret Prayer. Matthew vi. 6.1FATHER divine, thy piercing EyeShoots thro' the darkest Night;In deep Retirement thou art nigh,With Heart-discerning Sight.2There shall that piercing Eye surveyMy duteous Homage paid,With ev'ry Morning's dawning Ray,And ev'ry Ev'ning's Shade.3O may thine own celestial FireThe Incense still inflame;While my warm Vows to Thee aspire,Thro' my Redeemer's Name.4So shall the Visits of thy LoveMy Soul in secret bless;So shalt thou deign in Worlds aboveThy Suppliant to confess.CLXXVIII. Seeking first the Kingdom of GOD, &c. Matthew vi. 33.1NOW let a true Ambition rise,And Ardour fire our Breast,To reign in Worlds above the SkiesIn heav'nly Glories drest.2Behold Jehovah's royal HandA radiant Crown display,Whose Gems with vivid Lustre shine,While Stars and Suns decay.3Away each grov'ling anxious CareBeneath a Christian's Thought!I spring to seize immortal Joys,Which my Redeemer bought.4Ye Hearts with youthful Vigour warm,The glorious Prize persue;Nor shall ye want the Goods of Earth,While Heav'n is kept in View.CLXXIX. Pardon spoken by CHRIST. Matthew ix. -2.1MY Saviour, let me hear thy VoicePronounce these Words of Peace;And all my warmest Pow'rs shall joinTo celebrate the Grace.2With gentle Smiles call me thy Child,And speak my Sins forgiv'n;The Accents mild shall charm mine EarAll like the Harps of Heav'n.3Chearful, where-e'er thy Hand shall lead,The darkest Path I'll tread;Chearful I'll quit these mortal Shores,And mingle with the Dead.4When dreadful Guilt is done away,No other Fears we know;That Hand, which scatters Pardons down,Shall Crowns of Life bestow.CLXXX. The relapsing Daemoniack. Matthew xii. 43-45.1SOv'reign of Heav'n, thine Empire spreadsO'er all the Worlds on high;And at thy Frown th' infernal Pow'rsIn wild Confusion fly.2Like Lightning from his glitt'ring ThroneThe great Arch-Traytor fell,Driv'n with enormous Ruin downTo Infamy and Hell.3Permitted now to range at large,And traverse wander thro'. Earth and Air,O'er captive human Souls he reigns,And boasts his Kingdom there.4Yet thence thy Grace can drive him outWith one almighty Word;O send thy potent Sceptre forth,And reign victorious, LORD.5Let wretched Pris'ners be releas'dThe smiling Light to view;Nor let the vanquish'd Foe returnTheir Bondage to renew.6May Grace compleat that wond'rous Work,Which thine own Pow'r begun,And fill from Satan's gloomy Realms,The Kingdom of thy Son.CLXXXI. The Faith of the Syrophenician Woman recommended. Matthew xv. 26, 27.1ALL-conqu'ring Faith, how high it rose,When Heav'n itself might seem t'oppose!All-gracious Lord, who didst appearMost merciful, when most severe!2Thus at thy Feet our Souls would fall,And loudly thus for Mercy call;"Thou Son of David, Pity shew,"And save us from th' infernal Foe".3Tho' viler than the Brutes we be,Our longing Eyes would wait on thee,Who dost to Dogs this Grace affordTo taste the Crumbs beneath thy Board.4But thou the humble Soul wilt raise,And all its Sorrows turn to Praise:Each self-abasing broken HeartShall with thy Children share a Part.CLXXXII. The Church built on a Rock, and secured against the Gates of Hell. Matt. xvi. 18.1NOW let the Gates of Zion sing,And challenge all her spiteful Foes:She triumphs in her Saviour King,In him, who from the Dead arose.2He is the Rock, on whom we rest,And firm on that Foundation stand;
Divine Compassion fills his Breast,His Word is sure, and strong his Hand.3Hell and its Host may rage in vain;Vain are their Counsels, and their Pow'r;Grim Death may marshall all his Train,And boast the Conquest of an Hour.4Breathless and pale his Servants lie,And know their former Place no more;Their Children raise his Praises high,And o'er their Fathers Dust adore.5Their Fathers Dust the LORD shall raise,And burst the Barriers of the Grave;Parents and Children join his Praise,Who thro' Eternity can save.CLXXXIII. CHRIST'S Transfiguration. Matt. xvii. 4-.1WHen at this Distance, Lord, we traceThe various Glories of thy Face,What Transport pours o'er all our Breast,And charms our Cares, and Woes to Rest!2With Thee in the obscurest CellOn some bleak Mountain would I dwell,Rather than pompous Courts behold,And share their Grandeur and their Gold.3Away, ye Dreams of mortal Joy!Raptures divine my Thoughts employ:I see the King of Glory shine;I feel his Love, and call him Mine.4On TaberThe Mountain on which Christ was transfigured. thus his Servants view'dHis Lustre, when transform'd he stood;And, bidding earthly Scenes farewell,Cried, "LORD, 'tis pleasant here to dwell".5Yet still our elevated EyesTo nobler Visions long to rise;That grand Assembly would we join,Where all thy Saints around thee shine.6That Mount how bright! Those Forms how fair!'Tis good to dwell for ever there.Come, Death, dear Envoy Messenger or Ambassador. of my GOD,And bear me to that blest Abode.CLXXXIV. The Grace of CHRIST in ministring to Men, and dying for them. Matt. xx. 28.1SAVIOUR of Men, and Lord of Love,How sweet thy gracious Name!With Joy that Errand we review,On which thy Mercy came.2While all thine own angelick BandsStood waiting on the Wing,Charm'd with the Honour to obeyThe Word of such a King;3For us mean wretched sinful MenThou laid'st that Glory by,First in our mortal Flesh to serve,Then in that Flesh to die.4Bought with thy Service and thy Blood,We doubly, LORD, are Thine;To thee our Lives we would devote,To thee our Death resign.5Blest Man, who in thy Cause consumesHis vig'rous Days with Zeal!Then with the last slow Ebb of BloodIs call'd thy Truth to Seal!CLXXXV. CHRIST'S compassionate Readiness to gather Souls. Matt. xxiii. 37, 38.1SEE how the Lord of Mercy spreadsHis gentle Hands abroad;And warns us of the circling Foes,That thirst to drink our Blood!2"Fly to the Shelter of my Arms,"And dwell secure from Fear;"Nor Earth nor Hell shall pluck you thence,"Or reach, and wound you there".3With anxious Heart the Parent-BirdThus calls her Offspring round,When horrid Vulturs beat the Air,And Slaughter stains the Ground.4The trembling Brood, by Nature taught,Fly to the known Retreat;Beneath her downy Wings are safe,And find the Shelter sweet.5But Men, alas! more thoughtless MenRefuse to lend an Ear;
Their only Refuge madly fly,And rather die, than hear.6They spurn the Saviour's offer'd GraceTill they his Wrath inflame;Then Deon lays them lowIn Agony, and Shame.CLXXXVI. The Abounding of Iniquity, and Coldness of Christian Love. Matt. xxiv. 12. For a Fast-Day.1ALAS for Britain, and her Sons!What hath she not to fear?The Sins, that ruin'd Salem once,O how triumphant here!2Alas the strong o'erflowing Tide!How fiercely doth it rage!And each foreboding Symptom joinsIn terrible Presage.3Yet who hath Eyes that can discern?Or who an Ear to hear?Whose Heart is trembling for the Ark,Or for his Country dear?4Cold is the Love of christian Breasts,If christian Breasts remain;And dying the last Sparks of Zeal,Or its last Efforts vain.5Of Britain, oft chastis'd and sav'd,What shall the End be found?
Shall not the Sword, that waves so long,Inflict the deeper Wound?O stay thine Arm, All-gracious GOD;Thy Spirit largely pour;He can the Streams of Guilt restrain,And dying Love restore.CLXXXVII. The final Sentence, and Happiness of the Righteous. Matt. xxv. 34.ATTEND mine Ear; my Heart rejoice;While Jesus from his Throne,Begirt with all th' angelick Hosts,Makes his last Sentence known.When Sinners cursed from his FaceTo raging Flames are driv'n,His Voice, with Melody divine,Thus calls his Saints to Heav'n."Blest of my Father, all draw near,"Receive the large Reward;"And rise with Raptures to possess"The Kingdom Love prepar'd."E'er Earth's Foundations first were laid,"This sov'reign Purpose wrought,"And rear'd those Palaces divine,"To which you now are brought."There shall you reign unnumber'd Years,"Protected by my Pow'r,"While Sin and Hell, and Pains and Cares"Shall vex your Souls no more".6Come, dear majestick Saviour, come,This Jubilee proclaim,And teach us Accents fit to praiseSo great, so dear a Name.CLXXXVIII. Relieving CHRIST in his poor Saints. Matt. xxv. 40.1JESUS, my Lord, how rich thy Grace!Thy Bounties how compleat!How shall I count the matchless Sum?How pay the mighty Debt?2High on a Throne of radiant LightDost Thou exalted shine;What can my Poverty bestow,When all the Worlds are Thine?3But thou hast Brethren here below,The Partners of thy Grace,And wilt confess their humble NamesBefore thy Father's Face.4In them Thou may'st be cloath'd, and fed,And visited, and chear'd,And in their Accents of DistressMy Saviour's Voice is heard.5Thy Face with Rev'rence and with LoveI in thy Poor would see;O let me rather beg my Bread,Than hold it back from Thee.CLXXXIX. The final Sentence, and Misery of the Wicked. Matt. xxv. 41.1AND will the Judge descend?And must the Dead arise?And not a single Soul escapeHis all-discerning Eyes?2And from his righteous LipsShall such a Sentence sound?And thro' the Millions of the Damn'dSpread black Despair around?3"Depart from me, Accurs'd,"To everlasting Flame,"For rebel Angels first prepar'd,"Where Mercy never came".4How will my Heart endureThe Terrors of that Day,When Earth and Heav'n before his FaceAstonish'd shrink away?5But e'er that Trumpet shakesThe Mansions of the Dead,Hark from the Gospel's gentle VoiceWhat joyful Tidings spread!6Ye Sinners, seek his Grace,Whose Wrath ye cannot bear;Fly to the Shelter of his Cross,And find Salvation there.7So shall that Curse remove,By which the Saviour bled,
And the last awful Day shall pourHis Blessings on your Head.CXC. CHRIST'S Submission to his Father's Will. Matt. xxvi. 42.1"FATHER divine, (the Saviour cried,While Horrors press'd on ev'ry Side,And prostrate on the Ground he lay)"Remove this bitter Cup away.2"But if these Pangs must still be borne,"Or helpless Man be left forlorn,"I bow my Soul before thy Throne,"And say, Thy Will, not mine be done".3Thus our submissive Souls would bow,And, taught by Jesus, lie as low;Our Hearts, and not our Lips alone,Would say, Thy Will, not ours be done.4Then, tho' like him in Dust we lie,We'll view the blissful Moment nigh,Which, from our Portion in his Pains,Calls to the Joy in which he reigns.CXCI. Reflections on the Disciples forsaking CHRIST, when he was betrayed. Matt. xxvi. -56.1BEHOLD the Son of GOD'S Delight;His Smiles how sweet! His Rays how bright!A Friend of Tenderness unknown:To the last Breath he lov'd his own.2But lo! his Friends, his Brethren dearFled, when they saw his Danger near;And not one gen'rous Heart remainsTo shield his Life, or share his Pains.3So frail is Man; so frail are we,When unsupported, LORD, by Thee;Thus shrinks our Faith; thus droops our Love,And thus our Vows abortive prove.4Blest Jesus, thine own Pow'r impart,And bind in Cords of Love my Heart:The Fugitive no more shall flee,But keep thro' Death its Hold on Thee.CXCII. CHRIST'S Complaint of his Father's forsaking him on the Cross. Matt. xxvii. 46.1WHAT doleful Accents do I hear?What piercing Cry invades mine Ear?Loaded with Shame, and bath'd in Blood,Who calls to a forsaking GOD?2Amazing and Heart-rending Sight!'Tis his own Darling and Delight,Who once in his Embraces lay,Dearer than all the Sons of Day!3Yet when this Jesus died for me,Distended on the cursed Tree,GOD stood afar, nor would affordOne pitying Look, one chearing Word.4What then, my Soul, must thou have felt,If press'd with all thy Load of Guilt,
Beneath whose Weight the Saviour cries,Who form'd the Earth, and built the Skies?5But in that dark tremendous Hour,Unconquer'd Faith exerts its Pow'r;My GOD, my Father, cried aloud,And Heav'n th' endearing Name avow'd.6From Death, from Earth he rais'd his Son,And gave him for his Cross a Throne;Triumphant there the Suff'rer reigns,And reaps the Harvest of his Pains.7Eternal Raptures there are known;Nor flows the Joy on him alone,But for his Sake the LORD hath swore,To leave the meanest Saint no more.CXCIII. The same. Matt. xxvii. 46.1MY Saviour, didst Thou die for me?For me send forth that bitter Cry?With bleeding Heart thy Wounds I see,Prepar'd at thy Command to die.2By all thine Anguish on the Cross,When GOD thy Father stood afar,Rich in thy temporary Loss,Thy Church is brought for ever near.3From far the Beamings of thy ThroneReviv'd my sympathizing Heart;Thy Love made Sinners Griefs thine own,Mine in thy Joys must take its Part.4Midst all the Splendours of thy Reign,Think on the Sorrows thou hast felt;
Nor let a Mourner weep in vain,For whom thy precious Blood was spilt.5While thro' Earth's darkest Gloom I tread,Dart to my Soul a chearing Ray;And on the Confines of the DeadThy Pow'r, as Lord of Life, display.CXCIV. The Angel's Reply to the Women, that sought CHRIST. Matt. xxviii. 5, 6.1YE humble Souls, that seek the Lord,Chase all your Fears away;And bow with Pleasure down to seeThe Place where Jesus lay.2Thus low the Lord of Life was brought;Such Wonders Love can do;Thus cold in Death that Bosom lay,Which throb'd, and bled for you.3A Moment give a Loose to Grief,Let grateful Sorrows rise,And wash the bloody Stains awayWith Torrents from your Eyes.4Then raise your Eyes, and tune your Songs,The Saviour lives again;Not all the Bolts and Bars of DeathThe Conqu'ror could detain.5High o'er th' angelick Bands he rearsHis once dishonour'd Head;And thro' unnumber'd Years he reigns,Who dwelt among the Dead.6With Joy like his shall ev'ry SaintHis empty Tomb survey;Then rise with his ascending Lord,Thro' all his shining Way.CXCV. CHRIST ever present with his Ministers and Churches. Matt. xxviii. -20.1WIDE o'er all Worlds the Saviour reigns;Unmov'd his Pow'r and Love remains;And on his Arm his Church shall rest.Fair Zion, joyful in her King,Thro' ev'ry changing Age shall sing,With his perpetual Presence blest.2Tyrannick Death, in vain thy Rage,Thy Triumphs new in ev'ry AgeO'er the first Heroes of his Host;Conscious of more than mortal Aid,Our bleeding Hearts are not dismay'd,But an immortal Leader boast.3Tho' buried deep in Dust they lie,Whose tuneful Voices rais'd on highLed the sweet Anthems to his Name;The Children learn the Fathers Song,And unform'd Tongues shall still prolongThe ever-present Saviour's Fame.4The present Saviour, He shall giveMillions of future Saints to live,And croud the Temples of his Grace:
The present Saviour, lo! he comesTo call whole Legions from their Tombs,And teach their Dust sublimer Praise.CXCVI. Departed Saints asleep. Mark v. 39.1"WHY flow these Torrents of Distress?(The gentle Saviour cries)"Why are my sleeping Saints survey'd"With unbelieving Eyes?2"Death's feeble Arm shall never boast,"A Friend of Christ is slain;"Nor o'er their meaner Part in Dust"A lasting Pow'r retain.3"I come, on Wings of Love I come,"The Slumb'rers to awake;"My Voice shall reach the deepest Tomb,"And all its Bonds shall break.4"Touch'd by my Hand in Smiles they rise;"They rise to sleep no more;"But rob'd with Light, and crown'd with Joy"To endless Day they soar".5Jesus, our Faith receives thy Word;And, tho' fond Nature weep,Grace learns to hail the pious Dead,And emulate their Sleep.6Our willing Souls thy Summons waitWith them to rest and praise;So let thy much-lov'd Presence chearThese separating Days.CXCVII. The Struggle between Faith and Unbelief. Mark ix. 24.1JESUS, our Souls delightful Choice,In Thee believing we rejoice;Yet still our Joy is mix'd with Grief,While Faith contends with Unbelief.2Thy Promises our Hearts revive,And keep our fainting Hopes alive;But Guilt and Fears and Sorrows rise,And hide the Promise from our Eyes.3O let not Sin and Satan boast,While Saints lie mourning in the Dust;Nor see that Faith to Ruin brought,Which thine own gracious Hand hath wrought.4Do Thou the dying Spark inflame;Reveal the Glories of thy Name;And put all anxious Doubts to Flight,As Shades dispers'd by op'ning Light.CXCVIII. CHRIST'S condescending Regard to little Children. Mark x. 14.1SEE Israel's gentle Shepherd standWith all-engaging Charms;Hark how he calls the tender Lambs,And folds them in his Arms!2"Permit them to approach, (he cries)"Nor scorn their humble Name;"For 'twas to bless such Souls as these,"The Lord of Angels came".3We bring them, LORD, in thankful Hands,And yield them up to Thee;Joyful, that we ourselves are Thine,Thine let our Offspring be.4Ye little Flock, with Pleasure hear;Ye Children, seek his Face;And fly with Transport to receiveThe Blessings of his Grace.5If Orphans they are left behind,Thy guardian Care we trust,That Care shall heal our bleeding Hearts,While weeping o'er their Dust.CXCIX. Christian Watchfulness. Mark xiii. 37.1AWAKE, my drowsy Soul, awake,And view the threat'ning Scene:Legions of Foes encamp around,And Treach'ry lurks within.2'Tis not this mortal Life aloneThese Enemies assail;All thine eternal Hopes are lost,If their Attempts prevail.3Now to the Work of GOD awake;Behold thy Master near;The various, arduous Task persueWith Vigour and with Fear.4The awful Register goes on,Th' Account will surely come,And op'ning Day, or closing NightMay bear me to my Doom.5Tremendous Thought! How deep it strikes!Yet like a Dream it flies,Till GOD's own Voice the Slumbers chaseFrom these deluded Eyes.CC. The Nativity of Christ. Luke ii. 10-12.1HALL Progeny Offspring. divine!Hail Virgin's wondrous Son!Who, for that humble Shrine,Didst quit th' Almighty's Throne:The Infant LordOur Voices sing,And be the KingOf Grace ador'd.2Ye Princes, disappear,And boast your Crowns no more;Lay down your Sceptres here,And in the Dust adore:Where Jesus dwells,The Manger bareIn Lustre farYour Pomp excells.3With Bethlem's Shepherds mildThe Angels bow their Head;And round the sacred ChildTheir guardian Wings they spread;They knew, that whereTheir Sov'reign liesIn low DisguiseHeav'n's Court is there.4Thither, my Soul, repair,And early Homage payTo thy Redeemer fair,As on his natal Birth-Day. Day.I kiss thy Feet;And, Lord, would beA Child like Thee,Whom thus I greet.CCI. The Angels Song at Christ's Birth. Luke ii. 13, 14.1HIGH let us swell our tuneful Notes,And join th' angelick Throng;For Angels no such Love have knownT' awake a chearful Song.2Good-Will to sinful Men is shewn,And Peace on Earth is giv'n;For lo! th' incarnate Saviour comesWith Messages from Heav'n.3Justice and Grace with sweet AccordHis rising Beams adorn;Let Heav'n and Earth in Consort join,Now such a Child is born.4Glory to GOD in highest StrainsIn highest Worlds be paid;His Glory by our Lips proclaim'd,And by our Lives display'd.5When shall we reach those blissful Realms,Where Christ exalted reigns,
And learn of the celestial ChoirTheir own immortal Strains?CCII. Simeon's Song and Declaration to the Virgin Mary. Luke ii. 30-35.1OUR Eyes Salvation see,Prepar'd by Grace divine:How wide its Splendours are diffus'd!How bright its Glories shine!2Thro' distant Heathen LandsIt darts a vivid Ray,And to the Realms, where Saian reign'd,Imparts celestial Day.3The Israel of the LORDIn Christ their Glory boast,And on the Honours of his NameTheir whole Salvation trust.4By him shall Millions riseTo an immortal Crown,And Millions, that his Grace despise,Shall sink in Ruin down.5Our Reck'ning is begun,And on th' Account will go,Till clos'd in everlasting JoyOr never-ending Woe.CCIII. CHRIST's Message. Luke iv. 18, 19.1HARK the glad Sound! The Saviour comes,The Saviour promis'd long!
Let ev'ry Heart prepare a Throne,And ev'ry Voice a Song.2On him the Spirit largely pour'dExerts its sacred Fire;Wisdom and Might, and Zeal and LoveHis holy Breast inspire.3He comes the Pris'ners to releaseIn Satan's Bondage held;The Gates of Brass before him burst,The Iron Fetters yield.4He comes from thickest Films of ViceTo clear the mental Ray,And on the Eye-Balls of the BlindTo pour celestial Day.5He comes the broken Heart to bind,The bleeding Soul to cure,And with the Treasures of his GraceT' inrich the humble Poor.6His Silver Trumpets publish loudThe Jub'lee of the LORD The acceptable Year of the Lord, i. e. the Year of Jubilee. Levit. xxv.;Our Debts are all remitted now,Our Heritage restor'd.7Our glad Hosannas, Prince of Peace,Thy Welcome shall proclaim;And Heav'n's eternal Arches ringWith thy beloved Name.CCIV. The recovered Daemoniack, an Emblem of a converted Sinner. Luke viii. 35.1JESUS, we own thy saving Pow'r,And thy victorious Hand;Hell's Legions tremble at thy Feet,And fly at thy Command.2O'er Souls, by Passions Uproar fill'dWith Anarchy Confusion and Disorder. unknown,The nob'er Pow'rs, restor'd by Thee,Ascend their peaceful Throne.3No more they rend their Clothing off;No more their Wounds repeat;But gentle and compos'd they waitAttentive at thy Feet.4O'er Thousands more, where Satan rules,May we such Triumphs see;And be their rescu'd Souls and oursDevoted, LORD, to Thee.CCV. The good Samaritan. Luke x. 30-37.1FATHER of Mercies, send thy GraceAll-pow'rful from aboveTo form in our obedient SoulsThe Image of thy Love.2O may our sympathizing BreastsThat gen'rous Pleasure know
Kindly to share in others Joy,And weep for others Woe!3When the most helpless Sons of GriefIn low Distress are laid,Soft be our Hearts their Pains to feel,And swift our Hands to aid.4So Jesus look'd on dying Men,When thron'd above the Skies,And 'midst th' Embraces of his GODHe felt Compassion rise.5On Wings of Love the Saviour flewTo raise us from the Ground,And made the richest of his BloodA Balm for ev'ry Wound.CCVI. The Care of the Soul, the one Thing needful. Luke x. 42-.1WHY will ye lavish out your YearsAmidst a thousand trifling Cares?While in this various Range of ThoughtThe one Thing needful is forgot?2Why will ye chase the fleeting Wind,And famish an immortal Mind?While Angels with Regret look downTo see you spurn a heav'nly Crown?3Th' Eternal GOD calls from above,And Jesus pleads his bleeding Love;Awaken'd Conscience gives you Pain;And shall they join their Pleas in vain?4Not so your dying Eyes shall viewThose Objects, which ye now persue;Not so shall Heav'n and Hell appear,When the decisive Hour is near.5Almighty GOD, thy Pow'r impartTo fix Convictions on the Heart;Thy Pow'r unveils the blindest Eyes,And makes the haughtiest Scorner wise.CCVII. Mary's Choice of the better Part. Luke x. -42.1BESET with Snares on ev'ry Hand,In Life's uncertain Path I stand:Saviour divine, diffuse thy LightTo guide my doubtful Footsteps right.2Engage this roving treach'rous HeartTo fix on Mary's better Part;To scorn the Trifles of a DayFor Joys, that none can take away.3Then let the wildest Storms arise;Let Tempests mingle Earth and Skies;No fatal Shipwreck shall I fear,But all my Treasures with me bear.4If thou, my Jesus, still be nigh,Chearful I live, and joyful die:Secure, when mortal Comforts flee,To find ten thousand Worlds in Thee.CCVIII. CHRIST'S little Flock comforted with the Views of a Kingdom. Luke xii. 32.1YE little Flock, whom Jesus feeds,Dismiss your anxious Cares;Look to the Shepherd of your Souls,And smile away your Fears.2Tho' Wolves and Lions prowl around,His Staff is your Defence:'Midst Sands and Rocks your Shepherd's VoiceCalls Streams and Pastures thence.3Your Father will a Kingdom give,And give it with Delight;His feeblest Child his Love shall callTo triumph in his Sight.4Ten thousand Praises, LORD, we bringFor sure Supports like these:And o'er the pious Dead we singThy living Promises.5For all we hope, and they enjoy,We bless a Saviour's Name;Nor shall that Stroke disturb the Song,Which breaks this mortal Frame.CCIX. Providing Bags, that wax not old, &c. Luke xii. 33.1THESE mortal Joys, how soon they fade!How swift they pass away!The dying Flow'r reclines its Head,The Beauty of a Day!2The Bags are rent, the Treasures lost,We fondly call'd our own:Scarce could we the Possession boast,And strait we found it gone.3But there are Joys that cannot die,With GOD laid up in Store;Treasure beyond the changing Sky,Brighter than golden Ore.4To that my rising Heart aspires,Secure to find its Rest,And glories in such wide DesiresOf all their Wish possess'd.5The Seeds, which Piety and LoveHave scatter'd here below,In the fair fertile Fields aboveTo ample Harvests grow.6The Mite my willing Hands can giveAt Jesus' Feet I lay;Grace shall the humble Gift receive,And Heav'n at large repay.CCX. The active Christian. Luke xii. 35-38.1YE Servants of the LORD,Each in his Office wait,Observant of his heav'nly Word,And watchful at his Gate.2Let all your Lamps be bright,And trim the golden Flame;Gird up your Loins, as in his Sight,For awful is his Name.3Watch, 'tis your Lord's Command;And while we speak, he's near:Mark the first Signal of his Hand,And ready all appear.4O happy Servant heIn such a Posture found!He shall his Lord with Rapture see,And be with Honour crown'd.5Christ shall the Banquet spreadWith his own royal Hand,And raise that fav'rite Servant's HeadAmidst th' angelick Band.CCXI. Room at the Gospel-Feast. Luke xiv. 22.1THE King of Heav'n his Table spreads,And Dainties crown the Board;Not Paradise with all its JoysCould such Delight afford.2Pardon and Peace to dying Men,And endless Life are giv'n,And the rich Blood, that Jesus shedTo raise the Soul to Heav'n.3Ye hungry Poor, that long have stray'dIn Sin's dark Mazes, come:Come from the Hedges and Highways,And Grace shall find you Room.4Millions of Souls in Glory nowWere fed, and feasted here;And Millions more, still on the Way,Around the Board appear.5Yet is his House and Heart so large,That Millions more may come;Nor could the wide assembling WorldO'er-fill the spacious Room.6All Things are ready; come away,Nor weak Excuses frame;Croud to your Places at the Feast,And bless the Founder's Name.CCXII. The present and future State of the Saint and Sinner compared. Luke xvi. 25.1IN what Confusion Earth appears!GOD's dearest Children bath'd in Tears;While they, who Heav'n itself deride,Riot in Luxury and Pride.2But patient let my Soul attend,And, e'er I censure, view the End:That End how diff'rent who can tell?The wide Extremes of Heav'n and Hell.3See the red Flames around him twine,Who did in Gold and Purple shine!Nor can his Tongue one Drop obtainT' allay the Scorching of his Pain.4While round the Saint, so poor below,Full Rivers of Salvation flow;On Abram's Breast he leans his Head,And banquets on celestial Bread.5Jesus, my Saviour, let me shareThe meanest of thy Servants Fare:
May I at last approach to tasteThe Blessings of thy Marriage-Feast.CCXIII. Rebels against CHRIST executed. Luke xix. 27.1HE comes; the royal Conqu'ror comes;His Legions fill the Sky;Angelick Trumpets rend the Tombs,And loud proclaim him nigh.2Ye rebel Hosts, how vain your RageAgainst this sov'reign Lord?What Madness bears you on t' engageThe Terrors of his Sword?3"Bring forth (he cries) those Sons of Pride,"That scorn'd my gentle Sway,"To prove the Arm they once defy'd"Omnipotent to slay".4Tremendous Scene of Wrath divine!How wide the Vengeance spreads!His pointed Darts of Light'ning shineRound their defenceless Heads.5Now let the Rebels seek that Face,From which hey cannot flee?And thou, my Soul, adore the Grace,That sweetly conquer'd thee.CCXIV. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lest Souls. Luke xix. 41, 42.1WHAT venerable Sight appears?The Son of GOD dissolv'd in Tears!
Trace, O my Soul, with sad Surprize,The Sorrows of a Saviour's Eyes.2For whom, blest Jesus, we would know,Doth such a sacred Torrent flow?What Brother, or what Friend of thine,Is grac'd and mourn'd with Drops divine?3Nor Brother there, nor Friend I see,But Sons of Pride and Cruelty;Who like rapacious Tigers stoodInsatiate panting for thy Blood.4Dear Lord, and did thy gushing EyesThus stream o'er dying Enemies?And can thy Tenderness forgetThe Sinner humbled at thy Feet?5With deep Remorse our Bowels move,That we have wrong'd such matchless Love;Thy gentle Pity, Lord, display,And smile these trembling Fears away.6Give us to shine before thy Face,Eternal Trophies of thy Grace;Where Songs of Praise thy Saints employ,And mingle with a Saviour's Joy.CCXV. Departed Saints living to GOD. Luke xx. -38.1THrice happy State, where Saints shall liveAround their Father's Throne,In ev'ry Joy, that Heav'n can give,And live to GOD alone!2Unnumber'd Bands of kindred Minds,That dwelt in feeble Clay,Us and our Woes have left behindTo reign in endless Day.3Immortal Vigour now they breathe,And all the Air is Peace;They chide our Tears, that mourn the Death,Which brought their Souls Release.4Thus shall the Grace of Christ prevail,Till all his Chosen meet;And not the meanest Servant failHis Houshold to compleat.5To that blest Goal The End of a Race, where the Prize was hung. with ardent HasteOur active Souls would tend;Nor feel their Sorrows, as they pass'dTo such a blissful End.CCXVI. CHRIST'S Admonition to, and Care of Peter under approaching Trials. Luke xxii. 31, 32.1HOW keen the Tempter's Malice is!How artful, and how great!Tho' not one Grain shall be destroy'd,Yet will he sift the Wheat.2But GOD can all his Pow'r controul,And gather-in his Chain;And, where he seems to triumph most,The captive Soul regain.3There is a Shepherd kind and strong,Still watchful for his Sheep;Nor shall th infernal Lion rend,Whom he vouchsafes to keep.4Blest Jesus, intercede for us,That we may fall no more;O raise us, when we prostrate lie,And Comfort lost restore.5Thy secret Energy impart,That Faith may never fail;But, 'midst whole Show'rs of fiery Darts,That temper'd Shield prevail.6Secur'd ourselves by Grace divine,We'll guard our Brethren too;And, taught their Frailties by our own,Our Care of them renew.CCXVII. CHRIST'S Prayer for his Enemies. Luke xxiii. 34.1A LOUD I sing the wond'rous Grace,Christ to his Murd'rers bare;Which made the tort'ring Cross its Throne,And hung its Trophics there.2Father, forgive, his Mercy criedWith his expiring Breath,And drew eternal Blessings downOn those, who wrought his Death.3Then may I hope for Pardon too,Tho' I have pierc'd the Lord;
Blest Jesus, in my Favour speakThat all-prevailing Word.4I knew not what my Madness did,While I remain'd thy Foe:Soon as I saw the Wounds were Thine,My Tears began to flow.5Melted by Goodness so divine,I would its Footsteps trace;And, while beneath thy Cross I stand,My fiercest Foes embrace.CCXVIII. The Resurrection of CHRIST. Luke xxiv. 34.1YES, the Redeemer rose;The Saviour left the Dead;And o'er our hellish FoesHigh rais'd his conqu'ring Head:In wild DismayThe Guards aroundFell to the Ground,And sunk away.2Lo, the angelick BandsIn full Assembly meet,To wait his high Commands,And worship at his Feet:Joyful they come,And wing their WayFrom Realms of DayTo such a Tomb.3Then back to Heav'n they fly,And the glad Tidings bear:Hark! as they soar on highWhat Musick fills the Air!Their Anthems say,"Jesus who bled"Hath left the Dead;"He rose to-day".4Ye Mortals, catch the Sound,Redeem'd by him from Hell;And send the Eccho roundThe Globe on which you dwell:Transported cry,"Jesus who bled"Hath left the Dead"No more to die".5All-hail, triumphant Lord,Who sav'st us with thy Blood!Wide be thy Name ador'd,Thou rising, reigning God!With Thee we rise,With Thee we reign,And Empires gainBeyond the Skies.CCXIX. The Gospel first preached at Jerusalem. Luke xxiv.-47.1"GO, (saith the Lord) proclaim my Grace"To all the Sons of Adam's Race,"Pardon for ev'ry crimson Sin,"And at Jerusalem begin.2"There, where my Blood, not fully dry,"Stands warm upon Mount Calvary;"That Blood shall purge away their Guilt,"By whom so lately it was spilt.3"Now let the daring Rebels turn,"And o'er their bleeding Sov'reign mourn;"Their bleeding Sov'reign shall forgive,"And bid the Rebels look and live".4Is this thy Voice, All-gracious Lord?And did the Rebels hear thy Word?And did they fall beneath thy Feet,And on their Knees Forgiveness meet?5Then may I hope for Mercy too;Such Love can my hard Heart subdue,And give this guilty Soul a PlaceAmong these Captives of thy Grace.6Here be it daily mine EmployTo bathe thy Wounds with Tears of Joy,Till 'midst the new JerusalemIn one full Choir we sing thy Name.CCXX. GOD's Love to the World in sending CHRIST for its Redemption. John iii. 16.1SING to the LORD a new melodious Song:Assist the Choir, ye Tribes of ev'ry Tongue:Wide as the World his sov'reign Mercy reigns;Wide as the World resound the rapt'rous Strains.Ye Angels, join the joyful Acclamation,And sing the Love, that brings to Men Salvation.2His gracious Eye beheld in full SurveyWhere Adam's Race in mingled Ruin lay:No human Aid the Danger could avert:No Angel's Hand could soothe the raging Smart:In his own Breast divine Compassion rises,And the grand scheme the court of Heav'n surprises.3GOD's only Son with peerless unequalled. Glories bright,His Father's fairest Image and Delight,Justice and Grace the Victim have decreed,To wear our Flesh, and in that Flesh to bleed.Prostrate in Dust, ye Sinners, all adore him,And tremble, while your Hearts rejoice before him.4The wondrous work is done; the cov'nant stood,And Jesus expiates human Guilt with Blood;Nail'd to the Tree he bows his sacred Head;A mangled Corps he sojourns with the Dead;Rising, the Gospel sends thro' ev'ry Nation;Sinners believe, and gain compleat Salvation.5Father of Grace, accept our humble Praise;O let it run thro' everlasting Days!And Thou, Blest Saviour, spotless Lamb of GOD,Accept the Souls dear-ransom'd with thy Blood;And to those Songs, form all our feeble Voices,In which the choir round thy bright throne rejoices.CCXXI. The Spirit's Influences compared to living Water. John iv. 10.1BLEST Jesus, Source of Grace divine;What Soul-refreshing Streams are Thine!
O bring these healing Waters nigh,Or we must droop, and fall, and die.2No Traveller thro' desart Lands,'Midst scorching Suns, and burning Sands,More eager longs for cooling Rain,Or pants the Current to obtain.3Our longing Souls aloud would sing,Spring up, celestial Fountain, spring;To a redundant River slow,And chear this thirsty Land below.4May this blest Torrent near my SideThro' all the Desart gently glide;Then in Emanuel's Land aboveSpread to a Sea of Joy and Love.CCXXII. The Christian's secret Feast. John iv. 32.1WE praise the LORD for heav'nly Bread,With which immortal Souls are fed:We praise Thee for that heav'nly Feast,Which Jesus with Delight could taste.2He, while he sojourn'd here below,Had Meat, which Strangers could not know:That Meat he to his People gives,And he that tastes the Banquet lives.3So let me live, sustain'd by Grace,Regal'd with Fruits of Righteousness:Enter my Heart, All-gracious LORD,And sup with me, and deck thy Board.4Devotion, Faith, and zealous Love,And Hope, that bears the Soul above,Be these my Dainties, till I rise,And taste the Joys of Paradise.CCXXIII. The Paralytick at Bethesda. John v. 6.1BEHOLD the great Physician stands,Whose Skill is ever sure;And loud he calls to dying Men,And free he offers Cure.2And will ye hear his gracious Voice,While sore diseas'd ye lie?Or will ye all his Grace despise,And trifle till ye die?3Blest Jesus, speak the healing Word,And inward Vigour give;Then rais'd by Energy divineShall helpless Mortals live.4With chearful Pace our trembling FeetIn thy blest Paths shall run,Till Zion's healthful Hill they gain,Where no Complaint is known.CCXXIV. GOD's Purposes effectual, and CHRIST's Invitations sincere. John vi. 37.1IS there a Sight in Earth or Heav'nCan such Delight impart,As Jesus' wide-extended Arms,And softly-melting Heart?2"All that my heav'nly Father gives"Shall come (the Saviour cries)"And ev'ry weakest Soul, that comes,"Find Favour in mine Eyes.3"I'll not reject him with Disdain,"Nor hurl him down to Hell;"But folded in my kind Embrace"He safe and blest shall dwell".4Hearken, ye dying Sinners all;All hasten, while ye hear;For Crouds of wretched Souls at onceMay find their Refuge there.5I hear thy Voice, and I obey;Low at thy Feet I fall;Nor shall the Tempter's Voice prevailAgainst the Saviour's Call.CCXXV. CHRIST's Invitation to thirsty Souls John vii. 37.1THE Lord of Life exalted stands,Aloud he cries, and spreads his Hands:He calls ten thousand Sinners round,And sends a Voice from ev'ry Wound.2"Attend, ye thirsty Souls, draw near,"And satiate all your Wishes here:"Behold the living Fountain flows"In Streams as various as your Woes.3"An ample Pardon here I give,"And bid the sentenc'd Rebel live,
Shew him my Father's smiling Face,And lodge him in his dear Embrace.4I purge from Sin's detested Stain,And make the Crimson white again,Lead to celestial Joys refin'd,And lasting as the deathless Mind.5Must I anew my Pity prove?Witness the Words of melting Love,The gushing Tear, the lab'ring Breath,And all these Scars of bleeding Death".6Blest Saviour, I can doubt no more;I hear, and wonder, and adore:Panting I seek that Fountain-Head,Whence Waters so divine proceed.7Clear Spring of Life, flow on, and rollWith growing Swell from Pole to Pole,Till Flow'rs and Fruits of ParadiseRound all the winding Current rise.8Still near thy Stream may I be found,Long as I tread this earthly Ground;Chear with thy Wave Death's gloomy Shade,Then thro' the Fields of Canaan spread.CCXXVI. True Liberty given by CHRIST. John viii. 36.1HArk! for 'tis GOD's own Son that callsTo Life and Liberty;Transported fall before his Feet,Who makes the Pris'ners free.2The cursed Bonds of Sin he breaks,And breaks old Satan's Chain:Smiling he deals those Pardons round,Which free from endless Pain.3Into the captive Heart he poursHis Spirit from on high;We lose the Terrors of the Slave,And Abba, Father, cry.4Shake off your Bonds, and sing his Grace;The Sinner's Friend proclaim;And call on all around to seekTrue Freedom by his Name.5Walk on at large, till you attainYour Father's House above;There shall you wear immortal Crowns,And sing redeeming Love.CCXXVII. The same. John viii. 36.1AND shall we still be Slaves,And in our Fetters lie,When summon'd by a Voice divineT' assert our Liberty?2Did the great Saviour bleedOur Freedom to obtain,That we should trample on his Blood,And glory in our Chain?3Alas, the sordid Mind!How all its Pow'rs are broke!Proud of a Tyrant's haughty Sway,And practis'd to the Yoke!4Divine Redeemer, hear,Thy sov'reign Pow'r impart,And let thy gen'rous Spirit wakeTrue Ardour in our Heart.5Then shall the Sons of Death,That in the Dungeon lie,Spring to the Throne of pard'ning Grace,And Abba, Father, cry.CCXXVIII. CHRIST the Door. John x. 9.1AWAKE our Souls, and bless his Name,Whose Mercies never fail;Who opens wide a Door of HopeIn Achor's gloomy Vale Hosea ii. 15..2Behold the Portal wide display'd,The Buildings strong and fair;Within are Pastures fresh and green,And living Streams are there.3Enter, my Soul, with chearful Haste,For Jesus is the Door;Nor fear the Serpent's wily Arts,Nor fear the Lion's Roar.4O may thy Grace the Nations lead,And Jews and Gentiles come,All trav'ling thro' one beauteous GateTo one eternal Home.CCXXIX. Abundant Life by CHRIST our Shepherd. John x. -10.1PRaise to our Shepherd's gracious Name,Who on so kind an Errand came;Came, that by him his Flock might live,And more abundant Life receive.2Hail great Emanuel from above,High seated on thy Throne of Love!O pour the vital Torrent down,Thy People's Joy, their Lord's Renown.3Scarce half alive we sigh and cry;Scarce raise to Thee our languid Eye;Kind Saviour, let our dying StateCompassion in thy Heart create.4The Shepherd's Blood the Sheep must heal;O may we all its Influence feel;Till inward deep Experience shew,Christ can begin a Heav'n below.CCXXX. CHRIST's Sheep described. John x. 27.1THY Flock, with what a tender Care,Blest Jesus, dost thou keep?Fain would my weak, my wand'ring SoulBe number'd with thy Sheep.2Gentle and tractable and plainMy Heart would ever be,Averse to harm, propense to help,And faithful still to Thee.3The gentle Accents of thy VoiceMy list'ning Soul would hear;And, by the Signals of thy Will,I all my Course would steer.4I follow where my Shepherd leads,And mark the Path he drew;My Shepherd's Feet Mount Zion tread,And I shall reach it too.CCXXXI. The Happiness and Security of CHRIST'S Sheep. John x. 28.1MY Soul, with Joy attendWhile Jesus Silence breaks;No Angel's Harp such Musick yields,As what my Shepherd speaks.2"I know my Sheep, (he cries)"My Soul approves them well:"Vain is the treach'rous World's Disguise,"And vain the Rage of Hell.3"I freely feed them now"With Tokens of my Love,"But richer Pastures I prepare,"And sweeter Streams above.4"Unnumber'd Years of Bliss"I to my Sheep will give;"And, while my Throne unshaken stands,"Shall all my Chosen live.5"This tried almighty Hand"Is rais'd for their Defence:
"Where is the Pow'r shall reach them there?"Or what shall force them thence"?6Enough, my Gracious Lord,Let Faith triumphant cry;My Heart can on this Promise live,Can on this Promise die.CCXXXII. CHRIST's Sheep given by the Father, and guarded by Omnipotence. John x. 29, 30.1IN one harmonious chearful Song,Ye happy Saints, combine;Loud let it sound from ev'ry Tongue,The Saviour is divine.2The least, the feeblest of the SheepTo him the Father gave;Kind is his Heart the Charge to keep,And strong his Arm to save.3In Christ th' Almighty Father dwells,And Christ and he are One;That Rebel-Pow'r, which Christ assails,Attacks th' eternal Throne.4That Hand, which Heav'n and Earth sustains,And bars the Gates of Hell,And rivets Satan down in Chains,Shall guard his Chosen well.5Now let th' infernal Lion roar,How vain his Threats appear!When he can match Jehovah's Pow'r,I will begin to fear.CCXXXIII. The attractive Influence of a crucified Saviour. John xii. 32.1BEHOLD th' amazing Sight,The Saviour lifted high!Behold the Son of GOD'S DelightExpire in Agony!2For whom, for whom, my Heart,Were all these Sorrows borne?Why did he feel that piercing Smart,And meet that various Scorn?3For Love of us he bled,And all in Torture died:'Twas Love, that bow'd his fainting Head,And op'd his gushing Side.4I see, and I adoreIn Sympathy of Love:I feel the strong attractive Pow'rTo lift my Soul above.5Drawn by such Cords as these,Let all the Earth combineWith chearful Ardour to confessThe Energy divine.6In Thee our Hearts unite,Nor share thy Griefs alone,But from thy Cross persue their FlightTo thy triumphant Throne.CCXXXIV. CHRIST'S mysterious Conduct to be unfolded hereafter. John xiii. 7.1JESUS, we own thy sov'reign Hand,Thy faithful Care we own;
Wisdom and Love are all thy Ways,When most to us unknown.2By Thee the Springs of Life were form'd,And by thy Breath are broke,And good is ev'ry awful Word,Our gracious Lord hath spoke.3To Thee we yield our Comforts up,To Thee our Lives resign;In Straits and Dangers rich and safe,If we and ours are Thine.4Thy Saints in earlier Life remov'dIn sweeter Accents sing;And bless the Swiftness of their Flight,That bore them to their King.5The Burdens of a lengthen'd DayWith Patience we would bear;Till Ev'ning's welcome Hour shall shew,We were our Master's Care.CCXXXV. CHRIST'S Pity and Consolation for his troubled Disciples. John xiv. 1-3.1PEACE, all ye Sorrows of the Heart,And all my Tears be dry;That Christian ne'er can be forlorn,That views his Jesus nigh.2"Let not your Bosoms throb, (he says)"Nor be your Souls afraid:"Trust in your GOD'S almighty Name,"And trust your Saviour's Aid.3"Fair Mansions in my Father's House"For all his Children wait;"And I, your elder Brother, go"To open wide the Gate.4"And if I thither go before"A Dwelling to prepare,"I surely shall return again,"That I may fix you there.5"United in eternal Love,"My Chosen shall remain,"And with rejoicing Hearts shall share"The Honours of my Reign".6Yes, Lord; thy gracious Words we hear,And cordial Joys they bring:Frail Nature may extort a Groan,But Faith shall learn to sing.CCXXXVI. The Christian's Life connected with that of CHRIST. John xiv. -19.1THE Cov'nant of a Saviour's LoveShall stand for ever good,And thus his Life shall guard the Souls,He purchas'd with his Blood.2"I live for ever, (saith the Lord)"And you shall therefore live;"Receive with Pleasure ev'ry Pledge"My Pow'r and Love can give".3We own the Promise, Prince of Grace,Tho' earthly Helpers die;
And animate our fainting Hearts,While Christ our Friend is nigh.4The King of Fears can do no moreThan stop our mortal Breath;But Jesus gives a nobler Life,That cannot yield to Death.CCXXXVII. Abiding in CHRIST necessary to our Fruitfulness. John xv. 4.1LORD of the Vineyard, we adoreThat Pow'r and Grace divine,Which plants our wild, our barren SoulsIn Christ the living Vine.2For ever may they there abide,And from that vital RootBe Influence spread thro' ev'ry BranchTo form and feed the Fruit.3Shine forth, my GOD, the Clusters warmWith Rays of sacred Love;Till Eden's Soil, and Zion's StreamsThe gen'rous Plant improve.CCXXXVIII. Our Prayers effectual, when we abide in CHRIST, and his Word abideth in us. John xv. 8.1HALL; gracious Saviour, All-divine!Mysterious, ever-living Vine!To Thee united may we live,And nourish'd by thine Influence thrive.2Still may our Souls in Thee abide,Torn by no Tempests from thy Side;Nor from its Place within our HeartThy Promise, or thy Law depart.3Then shall our Pray'rs accepted rise,Thro' Thee a grateful Sacrifice;And all our Sighs before thy ThroneDescend in ample Blessings down.4In silent Hope our Souls shall waitTheir Pension from thy Mercy's Gate;Nor can our Lips or Hearts expressA Wish proportion'd to thy Grace.CCXXXIX. Continuing in CHRIST'S Love. John XV. 9.1TO all his Flock, what wond'rous LoveDoth our kind Shepherd bear?As he to his great Father's Heart,So we to his are dear.2So sure, so constant, and so strongDo his Endearments prove:O may their Energy prevailTo fix us in his Love.3No more let my divided HeartFrom this blest Center turn;But, fir'd by such all-potent Rays,With Flames immortal burn.4Descend, and all thy Pow'r display,And all thy Love reveal;
That the warm Streams of Jesus' BloodThis frozen Heart may feel.CCXL. The Apostles and Christians chosen by CHRIST to bring forth permanent Fruit. John xv. 16.1I Own, my GOD, thy sov'reign Grace,And bring the Praise to Thee;If Thou my chosen Portion art,Thou first hast chosen me.2My gracious Counsellor and GuideWill hear me when I pray;Nor, while I urge a Saviour's Name,Will frown my Soul away.3Blest Jesus, animate my HeartWith Beams of heav'nly Love,And teach that cold unthankful SoilThe heav'nly Seed t' improve.4In copious Show'rs thy Spirit sendTo water all the Ground;So to the Honour of thy NameShall lasting Fruit be found.CCXLI. Peace in CHRIST amidst Tribulations. John xvi. 33.1HEnceforth let each believing HeartFrom anxious Sorrows cease:Tho' Storms of Trouble rage around,In Jesus we have Peace.2His Blood from Wrath to come redeems,And his almighty Grace,By bitt'rest Draughts of deep Distress,Its healing Pow'r displays.3Jesus, our Captain, march'd beforeTo lead us to the Fight;And now he reacheth out the CrownWith heav'nly Glories bright.4Lord, 'tis enough; thy Voice we hear;That Crown by Faith we see:No Sorrows shall o'erwhelm our Souls,Since none divide from Thee.CCXLII. CHRIST sanctifying himself, that his People may be sanctified. John xvii. 19.1BEHOLD the bleeding Lamb of GOD,Our spotless Sacrifice!By Hands of barb'rous Sinners seiz'd,Nail'd to the Cross he dies.2Blest Jesus, whence this streaming Blood,And whence this foul Disgrace?Whence all these pointed Thorns, that rendThy venerable Face?3"I sanctify myself (he cries)"That thou may'st holy be;"Come, trace my Life; come, view my Death,"And learn to copy Me".4Dear Lord, we pant for Holiness,And inbred Sin we mourn:
To the bright Path of thy CommandsOur wand'ring Footsteps turn.5Not more sincerely would we wishTo climb the heav'nly Hill,Than here with all our utmost Pow'rThy Model to fulfill.CCXLIII. Meditations on the Sepulchre in the Garden. John xix. 41.1THE Sepulchres, how thick they standThro' all the Road on either Hand!And burst upon the startling SightIn ev'ry Garden of Delight!2Thither the winding Alleys tend;There all the flow'ry Borders end;And Forms, that charm'd the Eyes before,Fragrance and Musick are no more.3Deep in that damp and silent CellMy Fathers, and my Brethren dwell;Beneath its broad and gloomy ShadeMy Kindred, and my Friends are laid.4But, while I tread the solemn Way,My Faith that Saviour would survey,Who deign'd to sojourn in the Tomb,And left behind a rich Perfume.5My Thoughts with Extacy unknown,While from his Grave they view his Throne,Thro' mine own Sepulchre can seeA Paradise reserv'd for me.CCXLIV. CHRIST ascending to his Father and GOD, and ours. John xx. 17.1IN Raptures let our Hearts ascendOur heav'nly Seats to view,And grateful trace that shining Path,Our rising Saviour drew.2"Up to my Father, and my GOD,"I go; (the Conqu'ror cries)"Up to your Father, and your GOD,"My Brethren, lift your Eyes".3And doth the Lord of Glory callSuch Worms his Brethren dear?And doth he point to Heav'n's high Throne,And shew our Father there?4And doth he teach my sinful LipsThat tuneful Sound, my GOD?And breathe his Spirit on my HeartTo shed his Grace abroad?5O World, produce a Good like this,And thou shalt have my Love;Till then, my Father claims it all,And Christ, who dwells above.6Dear Jesus, call this willing Soul,That struggles with its Clay;And fain would leave this weary LoadTo wing its airy Way.CCXLV. The Disciples Joy at CHRIST'S Appearance to them after his Resurrection. John xx. 19, 20.1COME, our indulgent Saviour, come,Illustrious Conqu'ror o'er the Tomb:Here thine assembled Servants bless,And fill our Hearts with sacred Peace.2O come Thy-self, most gracious Lord,With all the Joy thy Smiles afford;Reveal the Lustre of thy Face,And make us feel thy vital Grace.3With Rapture kneeling round we greetThy pierced Hands, thy wounded Feet;And from the Scar, that marks thy Side,We see our Life's warm Torrent glide.4Enter our Hearts, Redeemer blest;Enter, thou ever-honour'd Guest,Not for one transient Hour alone,But there to fix thy lasting Throne.5Own this mean Dwelling as Thine own;And; when our Life's last Hour is come,Let us but die, as in thy Sight,And Death shall vanish in Delight.CCXLVI. Appeal to CHRIST for the Sincerity of Love to him. John xxi. 15.1DO not I love Thee, O my Lord?Behold my Heart and see;
And turn each cursed Idol out,That dures to rival Thee.2Do not I love Thee from my Soul?Then let me Nothing love:Dead be my Heart to ev'ry Joy,When Jesus cannot move.3Is not thy Name melodious stillTo mine attentive Ear?Doth not each Pulse with Pleasure boundMy Saviour's Voice to hear?4Hast Thou a Lamb in all thy Flock,I would disdain to feed?Hast Thou a Foe, before whose FaceI fear thy Cause to plead?5Would not mine ardent Spirit vie endeavour to equal.With Ange's round the Throne,To execute thy sacred Will,And make thy Glory known?6Would not my Heart pour forth its BloodIn Honour of thy Name?And challenge the cold Hand of DeathTo damp th' immortal Flame?7Thou know'st I love Thee, Dearest Lord:But O! I long to soarFar from the Sphere of mortal Joys,And learn to love Thee more.CCXLVII. Zeal for the Cause of CHRIST; or Peter and John following their Master. John xxi. 18-20 See Family Expositor in Loc..1BLest Men, who stretch their willing Hands,Submissive to their Lord's Commands,And yield their Liberty and BreathTo him, that lov'd their Souls in Death!2Lead me to suffer, and to die,If Thou, my gracious Lord, art nigh:One Smile from Thee my Heart shall fire,And teach me smiling to expire.3If Nature at the Trial shake,And from the Cross or Flames draw back,Grace can its seeble Courage raise,And turn its Tremblings into Praise.4While scarce I dare, with Peter, say,"I'll boldly tread the bleeding Way",Yet in thy Steps, like John, I'd moveWith humble Hope, and silent Love.CCXLVIII. CHRIST exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour. Acts v. 31.1EXALTED Prince of Life, we ownThe royal Honours of thy Throne:'Tis fix'd by GOD's Almighty Hand,And Seraphs bow at thy Command.2Exalted Saviour, we confessThe sov'reign Triumphs of thy Grace;Where Beams of gentle Radiance shine,And temper Majesty divine.3Wide thy resistless Sceptre sway,Till all thine Enemies obey:Wide may thy Cross its Virtue prove,And conquer Millions by its Love.4Mighty to vanquish, and forgive!Thine Israel shall repent and live,And loud proclaim thy healing Breath,Which works their Life, who wrought thy Death.CCXLIX. The Believer committing his departing Spirit to JESUS. Acts vii. 59.1O Thou, that hast Redemption wrought,Patron of Souls, thy Blood hath bought,To Thee our Spirits we commit,Mighty to rescue from the Pit.2Millions of blissful Souls above,In Realms of Purity and Love,With Songs of endless Praise proclaimThe Honours of thy faithful Name.3When all the Pow'rs of Nature fail'd,Thine ever-constant Care prevail'd;Courage and Joy thy Friendship spoke,When ev'ry mortal Bond was broke.4We on that Friendship, Lord, repose,The healing Balm of all our Woes;
And we, when sinking in the Grave,Trust thine Omnipotence to save.5O may our Spirits by thy HandBe gather'd to that happy Band,Who, 'midst the Blessings of thy Reign,Lose all Remembrance of their Pain.6In Raptures there divinely sweetGive us our Kindred-Souls to meet,And wait with them that brighter Day,Which all thy Triumph shall display.CCL. PETER's Admonition to SIMON MAGUS. Acts viii. 21-24.1SEARCHER of Hearts, before thy FaceI all my Soul display;And conscious of its innate natural. ArtsIntreat thy strict Survey.2If lurking in its inmost FoldsI any Sin conceal,O let a Ray of Light divineThe secret Guile reveal.3If tinctur'd with that odious GallUnknowing I remain,Let Grace, like a pure silver Stream,Wash out th' accursed Stain.4If in these fatal Fetters boundA wretched Slave I lie,Smite off my Chains, and wake my SoulTo Light and Liberty.5To humble Penitence and Pray'rBe gentle Pity giv'n,Speak ample Pardon to my Heart,And seal its Claim to Heav'n.CCLI. The Descent of the Spirit, or his Influences desired. Acts x. 44.1GREAT Father of each perfect Gift,Behold thy Servants wait;With longing Eyes, and lifted HandsWe flock around thy Gate.2O shed abroad that royal Gift,Thy Spirit from above,To bless our Eyes with sacred Light,And fire our Hearts with Love.3With speedy Flight may he descend,And solid Comsort bring,And o'er our languid Souls extendHis all-reviving Wing.4Blest Earnest of eternal Joy,Declare our Sins forgiv'n;And bear with Energy divineOur raptur'd Thoughts to Heav'n.5Diffuse, O GOD, these copious Show'rs,That Earth its Fruit may yield,And change this barren WildernessTo Carmel's flow'ry Field Isaiah xxxv. 1. 2..CCLII. The Word of Salvation sent to us. Acts xiii. 26.1AND why do our admiring EyesThese Gospel-Glories see?And whence, doth ev'ry Heart reply,Salvation sent to me?2In fatal Shades of Midnight GloomTen thousand Wretches stray;And Satan blinds ten thousand moreAmidst the Blaze of Day.3Millions of raging Souls beneathIn endless Anguish hearHarmonious Sounds of Grace transform'dTo Ecchos of Despair.4And dost Thou, LORD, subdue my Heart,And shew my Sins forgiv'n,And bear thy Witness to my PartAmongst the Heirs of Heav'n?5As the Redeemed of the LORD,We sing the Saviour's Name;And, while the long Salvation lasts,Its sov'reign Grace proclaim.CCLIII. The Unknown GOD. Acts xvii. 23.1THOU, mighty LORD, art GOD alone,A King of Majesty unknown;And all thy dazling Glories riseBeyond the Reach of Angels Eyes.2Yet thro' this Earth thy Works proclaimSome Notice of thy rev'rend Name;And, where thy gracious Gospel shines,We read it in the fairest Lines.3But O! how few of Adam's RaceHave learn'd thy Nature and thy Ways!While thousands, ev'n in Lands of Light,Are buried in Egyptian Night.4They tread thy Courts, thy Word they hear,And to thy solemn Rites draw near;Yet, tho' Salvation seems so nigh,Because they know not GOD, they die.5Send thy victorious Gospel forthWide from these Regions of the North;And thro' thy Churches Grace impartTo write thy Name on ev'ry Heart.CCLIV. GOD's Command to all Men to repent. Acts xvii. 30.1REPENT, the Voice celestial cries,Nor longer dare delay:The Wretch that scorns the Mandate Command. dies,And meets a fiery Day.2No more the sov'reign Eye of GODO'erlooks the Crimes of Men;His Heralds are dispatch'd abroadTo warn the World of Sin.3The Summons reach thro' all the Earth;Let Earth attend and fear:
Listen, ye Men of royal Birth,And let their Vassals Subjects and Slaves. hear.4Together in his Presence bow,And all your Guilt confess;Accept the offer'd Saviour now,Nor trifle with the Grace.5Bow, e'er the awful Trumpet sound,And call you to his Bar;For Mercy knows th' appointed Bound,And turns to Vengeance there.6Amazing Love, that yet will call,And yet prolong our Days!Our Hearts subdu'd by Goodness fall,And weep, and love, and praise.CCLV. Paul's Sollicitude to finish his Course with Joy. Acts xx. 24.1ASSIST us, LORD, thy Name to praiseFor this rich Gospel of thy Grace;And, that our Hearts may love it more,Teach them to feel its vital Pow'r.2With Joy may we our Course persue,And keep the Crown of Life in View;That Crown, which in one Hour repaysThe Labour of ten thousand Days.3Should Bonds or Death obstruct our Way,Unmov'd their Terrors we'll survey;And the last Hour improve for Thee,The last of Life, or Liberty.4Welcome those Bonds, which may uniteOur Souls to their supreme Delight!Welcome that Death, whose painful StrifeBears us to Christ our better Life.CCLVI. Paul preaching and Felix trembling. Acts xxiv. 25.1GREAT Sov'reign of the human Heart,Thy mighty Energy impart,Which darts at once thro' Breasts of Steel,And makes the nether Milstone the hardest Hearts, Job xli. 24. feel.2Let Sinners tremble at thy Word,Struck by the Terrors of the LORD;And, while they tremble, let them flee,And seek their Help, their Life from Thee.3O let them seize the present Day,Nor risk Salvation by Delay:To-morrow, LORD, to Thee belongs;This Night may vindicate thy Wrongs.4This Night may stop their fleeting Breath,And seal them to eternal Death,May veil Redemption from their Sight,And give them Flames instead of Light.5Or should succeeding Years remain,Years, with their Sabbaths, all in vainBefore their darken'd Eyes may roll,And more obdurate leave the Soul.6Great Saviour, let thy Pity rise,And make the wretched Triflers wise;
Lest Pangs and Tremblings felt in vainHasten and feed immortal Pain.CCLVII. Help obtained of GOD. Acts xxvi. 22-. For New-Year's-Day.1GREAT GOD, we sing that mighty Hand,By which supported still we stand:The op'ning Year thy Mercy shews;That Mercy crowns it, till it close.2By Day, by Night, at Home, Abroad,Still are we guarded by our GOD,By his incessant Bounty fed,By his unerring Counsel led.3With grateful Hearts the Past we own;The Future, all to us unknown,We to thy guardian Care commit,And peaceful leave before thy Feet.4In Scenes exalted or depress'dThou art our Joy, and Thou our Rest:Thy Goodness all our Hopes shall raise,Ador'd thro' all our changing Days.5When Death shall interrupt these Songs,And seal in Silence mortal Tongues,Our Helper GOD, in whom we trust,In better Worlds our Souls shall boast.CCLVIII. Treasuring up Wrath by despising Mercy. Romans ii. 4, 5.1UNgrateful Sinners, whence this ScornOf long-extended Grace?
And whence this Madness, that insultsTh' Almighty to his Face?2Is it because his Patience waits,And pitying Bowels move,You multiply audacious Crimes,And spurn his richest Love?3Is all the treasur'd Wrath so small,You labour still for more,Tho' not eternal rolling YearsCan e'er exhaust the Store?4Swift doth the Day of Vengeance come,That must your Sentence seal;And righteous Judgment now unknownIn all its Pomp reveal.5Alarm'd and melted at thy Voice,Our conquer'd Hearts would bow;And, to escape the Thund'rer then,Embrace the Saviour now.CCLIX. The Love of GOD shed abroad in the Heart by the Spirit. Rom. v. 5.1DESCEND, immortal Dove;Spread thy kind Wings abroad,And, wrapt in Flames of holy Love,Bear all my Soul to GOD.2Jesus my Lord revealIn Charms of Grace divine,And be thyself the sacred Seal,That Pearl of Price is mine.3Behold my Heart expandsTo catch the heav'nly Fire;It longs to feel the gentle Bands,And groans with strong Desire.4Thy Love, my GOD, appears,And brings Salvation down,My Cordial thro' this Vale of Tears,In Paradise my Crown.CCLX. Christians quickened and raised by the Spirit. Rom. viii. 11.1WHY should our mourning Thoughts [delightTo grovel in the Dust?Or why should Streams of Tears uniteAround th' expiring Just?2Did not the Lord our Saviour die,And triumph o'er the Grave?Did not our Lord ascend on high,And prove his Pow'r to save?3Doth not the sacred Spirit come,And dwell in all the Saints?And should the Temples of his GraceResound with long Complaints?4Awake, my Soul, and like the SunBurst thro' each sable Cloud;And thou, my Voice, tho' broke with Sighs,Tune forth thy Songs aloud.5The Spirit rais'd my Saviour up,When he had bled for me;
And spite of Death and Hell shall raiseThy pious Friends and thee.6Awake, ye Saints, that dwell in Dust,Your Hymns of Vict'ry sing;And let his dying Servants trustTheir ever-living King.CCLXI. GOD's Readiness to give all Things argued from the Gift of his Son. Rom. viii. 32.1NOW let my Soul with Transport rise,And range thro' Earth, and mount the skies,And view each various Form of Good,Where Angels hold their high Abode.2I give my Thoughts unbounded Scope;On equal Pinions soars my Hope;My Faith at noblest Objects aims,And what she sees, she humbly claims.3Hath not the bounteous King of Heav'nFrom his Embrace already giv'nThat Son of his eternal Love,Who fill'd the brightest Throne above?4Behold his Hand on Jesus laid!Behold that Lamb a Victim made!And what shall Mercy hold too goodFor Sinners, ransom'd with his Blood?5My Soul, with heav'nly Faith embraceThe sacred Cov'nant of his Grace;Then in delightful Silence waitThe Issues of a Love so great.CCLXII. Believing with the Heart, and confessing with the Mouth, necessary to Salvation. Rom. x. 6-10.1AND is Salvation brought so near,Where sinful Men expiring lie?Triumph, my Soul, the Sound to hear,And shout it joyous to the Sky.2I ask not, who to Heav'n shall scale,That Christ the Saviour thence may come;Or who Earth's inmost Depths assailTo bring him from the dreary Tomb.3From Heav'n on Wings of Love he flew,And Conqu'ror from the Tomb he sprung:My Heart believes the Witness true,And dictates to my faithful Tongue.4I sing Salvation brought so near,No more on Earth expiring lie;I teach the World my Joys to hear,And shout them to the ecchoing Sky.CCLXIII. The living Sacrifice. Rom. xii. 1.1AND will th' eternal KingSo mean a Gift regard?That Off'ring, LORD, with Joy we bring,Which thine own Hand prepar'd.2We own thy various Claim,And to thine Altar move,The willing Victims of thy Grace,And bound with Cords of Love.3Descend, celestial Fire,The Sacrifice inflame;So shall a grateful Odour riseThro' our Redeemer's Name.CCLXIV. The near Approach of Salvation, an Engagement to Diligence and Love. Rom. xiii. 11.1AWake, ye Saints, and raise your Eyes,And raise your Voices high;Awake, and praise that sov'reign Love,That shews Salvation nigh.2On all the Wings of Time it flies;Each Moment brings it near;Then welcome each declining Day!Welcome each closing Year!3Not many Years their Round shall run,Nor many Mornings rise,E'er all its Glories stand reveal'dTo our admiring Eyes.4Ye Wheels of Nature, speed your Course;Ye mortal Pow'rs, decay;Fast as ye bring the Night of Death,Ye bring eternal Day.CCLXV. The GOD of Peace bruising Satan. Rom. xvi. 20-.1YE Armies of the living GOD,In his all-conqu'ring Name,
Lift up your Banners, and aloudYour Leader's Grace proclaim.2What tho' the Prince of Hell invadeWith Show'rs of fiery Darts,And join, to the fierce Lion's Roar,The Serpent's wily Arts?3Jesus, who leads his Hosts to War,Shall tread the Monster down,And ev'ry faithful Soldier shareThe Triumph and the Crown.4So Israel on the haughty NecksOf Canaan's Tyrants trod,And sung their Joshua's conqu'ring Sword,And sung their faithful GOD Joshua x. 24..CCLXVI. CHRIST our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Corinth. i. 30, 31.1MY GOD, assist me, while I raiseAn Anthem of harmonious Praise;My Heart thy Wonders shall proclaim,And spread its Banners in thy Name.2In Christ I view a Store divine:My Father, all that Store is Thine;By Thee prepar'd, by Thee bestow'd;Hail to the Saviour, and the GOD!3When gloomy Shades my Soul o'er-spread,"Let there be Light" th' Almighty said;
And Christ, my Sun, his Beams displays,And scatters round celestial Rays.4Condemn'd thy Criminal I stood,And awful Justice ask'd my Blood;That welcome Saviour from thy ThroneBrought Righteousness and Pardon down.5My Soul was all o'er-spread with Sin,And lo! his Grace hath made me clean:He rescues from th' infernal Foe,And full Redemption will bestow.6Ye Saints, assist my grateful Tongue:Ye Angels, warble back my Song:For Love like this demands the PraiseOf heav'nly Harps, and endless Days.CCLXVII. Being joined to CHRIST, and one Spirit with him. 1. Cor. vi. 17.1MY Saviour, I am ThineBy everlasting Bands;My Name, my Heart I would resign,My Soul is in thy Hands.2To Thee I still would cleaveWith ever-growing Zeal;Let Millions tempt me Christ to leave,They never shall prevail.3His Spirit shall uniteMy Soul to him, my Head;Shall from me to his Image bright,And teach his Path to tread.4Death may my Soul divideFrom this Abode of Clay;But Love shall keep me near his SideThro' all the gloomy Way.5Since Christ and we are One,What should remain to fear?If he in Heav'n hath fix'd his Throne,He'll fix his Members there.CCLXVIII. The transitory Nature of the World, an Argument for christian Moderation. 1 Cor. vii. 29, 30, 31.1SPRING up, my Soul, with ardent Flight,Nor let this Earth delude thy SightWith glitt'ring Trifles gay and vain:Wisdom divine directs thy ViewTo Objects ever grand and new,And Faith displays the shining Train.2Be dead, my Hopes, to all below;Nor let unbounded Torrents flow,When mourning o'er my wither'd Joys:So this deceitful World is known;Possess'd I call it not mine own,Nor glory in its painted Toys.3The empty Pageant rolls along;The giddy unexperienc'd ThrongPersue it with enchanted Eyes;
It passeth in swift March away,Still more and more its Charms decay,Till the last gaudy Colour dies Pageants, Images, or emblematical Figures in a Cavalcade or Procession, continually moving, and quickly gone out of Sight. See Family Expositor in Loc..4My GOD, to Thee my Soul shall turn;For Thee my noblest Passions burn,And drink in Bliss from Thee alone:I fix on that unchanging Home,Where never-fading Pleasures bloom,Fresh springing round thy radiant Throne.CCLXIX. GOD's Fidelity in moderating Temptations. 1 Cor. x. 13.1NOW let the Feeble all be strong,And make Jehovah's Arm their Song:His Shield is spread o'er ev'ry Saint,And thus supported, who shall faint?2What tho' the Hosts of Hell engageWith mingled Cruelty and Rage?A faithful GOD restrains their Hands,And chains them down in Iron Bands.3Bound by his Word he will displayA Strength proportion'd to our Day;And, when united Trials meet,Will shew a Path of safe Retreat.4Thus far we prove that Promise good,Which Jesus ratified with Blood:
Still is He gracious, wise, and just,And still in him let Israel trust.CCLXX. Bearing the Image of the earthy and the heavenly Adam. 1 Cor. xv. 49.1WITH flowing Eyes and bleeding HeartsA blasted World survey!See the wide Ruin Sin hath wroughtIn one unhappy Day!2Adam, in GOD's own Image form'd,From GOD and Bliss estrang'd,And all the Joys of ParadiseFor Guilt and Horror chang'd!3Ages of Labour and of GriefHe mourn'd his Glory lost;At length the goodliest Work of Heav'nSunk down to common Dust.4O fatal Heritage bequeath'dTo all his helpless Race!Thro' the thick Maze of Sin and WoeThus to the Grave we pass.5But, O my Soul, with Rapture hearThe second Adam's Name;And the celestial Gifts, he bringsTo all his Seed, proclaim.6In Holiness and Joy compleatHe reigns to endless Years,And each adopted chosen ChildHis splendid Image wears.7What tho' in mortal Life they mourn?What tho' by Death they fall?Jesus in one triumphant DayTransforms and crowns them all.8Praise to his rich mysterious Grace!Ev'n by our Fall we rise;And gain, for earthly Eden lost,A heav'nly Paradise.CCLXXI. Ministers comforted, that they may comfort others. 2 Cor. i. 4.1FOUNTAIN of Comfort and of Love,Thy Streams, how free they flow!First water all the World above,Then visit us below!2From Christ, the Head, what Grace descendsTo cherish ev'ry Part!He shares his Joys with all his Friends,For all have shar'd his Heart.3What tho' the Sorrows here they feelAre manifold and great?He brings new Consolations still,As various, and as sweet.4He shews our num'rous Sins forgiv'n,And shews our Cov'nant-GOD;He witnesseth our Right to Heav'n,The Purchase of his Blood.5Tho' Earth and Hell against us join,In Him we are secure;
Our Diadems shall brighter shineFor all we now endure.6On ev'ry faithful Shepherd's Breast,LORD, send these Comforts down;That they may lead thy Flock to Rest,Which their own Souls have known.CCLXXII. GOD's delivering Goodness acknowledged, and trusted. 2 Cor. i. 10.A Song for the 5th of November.1PRAISE to the LORD, whose mighty HandSo oft reveal'd hath sav'd our Land;And, when united Nations rose,Hath sham'd and scourg'd our haughtiest Foes.2When mighty Navies from afarTo Britain wasted floating War,His Breath dispers'd them all with Ease,And sunk their Terror in the Seas referring to the Defeat of the Spanish Armada, 1588..3While for our Princes they prepareIn Caverns deep a burning Snare;He shot from Heav'n a piercing Ray,And the dark Treach'ry brought to Day Gun-powder-Plot..4Princes and Priests again combineNew Chains to forge, new Snares to twine;Again our gracious GOD appears,And breaks their Chains, and cuts their Snares.5Obedient Winds at his CommandConvey his Hero to our Land;The Sons of Rome with Terror view,And speed their Flight, when none persue Revolution by King William 1688..6Such great Deliv'rance GOD hath wrought,And down to us Salvation brought;And still the Care of Guardian-Heav'nSecures the Bliss itself hath giv'n.7In Thee we trust, Almighty LORD,Continu'd Rescue to afford:Still be thy pow'rful Arm made bare,For all thy Servants Hopes are there.CCLXXIII. Ministers a sweet Savour, whether of Life or Death. 2 Cor. ii. 15, 16.1PRAISE to the LORD on high,Who spreads his Triumphs wide!While Jesus' fragrant NameIs breath'd on ev'ry Side:Balmy and richThe Odours rise,And fill the Earth,And reach the Skies.2Ten thousand dying SoulsIts Influence feel and live;Sweeter than vital AirThe Incense they receive:They breathe anew,And rise and singJesus the Lord,Their conqu'ring King.3But Sinners scorn the Grace,That brings Salvation nigh;They turn their Face away,And faint, and fall, and die:So sad a Doom,Ye Saints, deplore,For O! they fallTo rise no more.4Yet, wise and mighty GOD,Shall all thy Servants be,In those, who live or die,A Savour sweet to Thee:Supremely brightThy Grace shall shine,Guarded with FlamesOf Wrath divine.CCLXXIV. GOD shining into the Heart. 2 Cor. iv. 6.1PRAISE to the LORD of boundless Might,With uncreated Glories bright!His Presence gilds the Worlds above;Th' unchanging Source of Light and Love.2Our rising Earth his Eye beheld,When in substantial Darkness veil'd;The shapeless Chaos, Nature's Womb,Lay buried in eternal Gloom Genesis i, 2, 3..3Let there be Light, JEHOVAH said,And Light o'er all its Face was spread:
Nature, array'd in Charms unknown,Gay with its new-born Lustre shone.4He sees the Mind, when lost it liesIn Shades of Ignorance and Vice;And darts from Heav'n a vivid lively, sprightly. Ray,And changes Midnight into Day.5Shine, mighty GOD, with Vigour shine,On this benighted Heart of mine;And let thy Glories stand reveal'd,As in the Saviour's Face beheld.6My Soul reviv'd by Heav'n-born Day,Thy radiant Image shall display,While all my Faculties uniteTo praise the LORD, who gives me Light.CCLXXV. The Gospel Treasure in earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. iv. 7.1HOW rich thy Bounty, King of Kings!Thy Favours how divine!The Blessings which thy Gospel brings,How splendidly they shine!2Gold is but Dross, and Gems but Toys,Should Gold and Gems compare;How mean, when set against those Joys,Thy poorest Servants share?3Yet all these Treasures of thy GraceAre lodg'd in Urns Vessels or Jars. of Clay;
And the weak Sons of mortal RaceTh' immortal Gifts convey.4Feebly they lisp thy Glories forth;Yet Grace the Vict'ry gives:Quickly they moulder back to Earth;Yet still thy Gospel lives.5Such Wonders Pow'r divine effects;Such Trophies Monuments or Tokens of Victory. GOD can raise;His Hand from crumbling Dust erects,Long Monuments of Praise.CCLXXVI. Living to him, who died for us. 2 Cor. v. 14, 15.1MY Lord, didst Thou endure such SmartMy Life, when forfeited, to save?And didst Thou bear upon thy HeartMy Name, when rising from the Grave?2Am I in thy Remembrance still,'Midst all the Glories of thy Throne?To form thy Servant to thy Will,And fix my Dwelling near thine own?3What can a feeble Worm repayFor Love so infinite as Thine?The Torrent bears my Soul away,Th' impetuous Stream of Grace divine referring to the Emphasis of the Original Word viz. bears us away like a strong Torrent..4To Thee, my Lord, it bears me on;Self shall be deify'd made a God of. no more;By Self betray'd, by Self undone,I live by thy recov'ring Pow'r.5Accept a Soul so dearly bought,Bought by thy Life upon the Tree;A Soul which, by thy Spirit taught,Knows no Delight, but serving Thee.CCLXXVII. GOD the Author of Consolation. 2 Cor. vii. 6.1THE LORD, how rich his Comforts are!How wide they spread! How high they rise!He pours in Balm to bleeding Hearts,And wipes the Tears from flowing Eyes.2I have no Hope, my Spirit cried,Just trembling on the Brink of Hell;I am thy Hope, the LORD replied,My Love secures its Fav'rites well.3My grateful Soul shall speak his Praise,Who turns its Tremblings into Songs;And those that mourn shall learn from me,Salvation to our GOD belongs.CCLXXVIII. Satan's Strong-Holds cast down by the Gospel. 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.1SHOUT, for the Battlements are fall'n,Which Heav'n itself defy'd!
Th' aspiring Tow'rs, dismantled demolished, broke down. all,Now spread their Ruins wide!2Thy wondrous Trumpets, Prince of Peace,Sent forth their mighty Sound;The Strength of Jericho was struck,And totter'd to the Ground Joshua vi. 20..3No more proud Reas'nings shall disputeWhat Truth divine declares;No more Self-Righteousness to pleadIts own Perfection dares.4No Strength our ruin'd Pow'rs can boastThy Precepts to fulfill:No Liberty we ask or wishFor our rebellious Will.5The Gates we open to admitThe Saviour's gentle Sway:Blest Jesus, 'tis thy Right to reign,Our Pleasure to obey.6Each Thought in sweet Subjection heldThy sov'reign Pow'r shall own;And ev'ry Traitor shall be slain,That dares dispute the Throne.CCLXXIX. The Christian Farewel. 2 Cor. xiii. 11.1THY Presence, Everlasting GOD,Wide o'er all Nature spreads abroad;Thy watchful Eyes, which cannot sleep,In ev'ry Place thy Children keep.2While near each other we remain,Thou dost our Lives and Souls sustain;When absent, happy if we shareThy Smiles, thy Counsels, and thy Care.3To Thee we all our Ways commit,And seek our Comforts near thy Feet;Still on our Souls vouchsafe to shine,And guard and guide us still as Thine.4Give us in thy beloved HouseAgain to pay our grateful Vows;Or, if that Joy no more be known,Give us to meet around thy Throne.CCLXXX. Living while in the Flesh by Faith in CHRIST, who loved us, &c. Galat. ii. 20.1MY Jesus, while in mortal FleshI hold my frail Abode,Still would my Spirit rest on Thee,Its Saviour, and its God.2By hourly Faith in Thee I live'Midst all my Griefs and Snares;And Death, encounter'd in thy Sight,No Form of Horror wears.3Yes, Thou hast lov'd this sinful Worm,Hast giv'n thyself for me,Hast bought me from eternal Death,Nail'd to the bloody Tree.4On thy dear Cross I fix mine Eyes,Then raise them to thy Seat;Till Love dissolve mine inmost Soul,At its Redeemer's Feet.5Be dead, my Heart, to worldly Charms;Be dead to ev'ry Sin;And tell the boldest Foes without,That Jesus reigns within.6My Life with his connected stands,Nor asks a surer Ground;He keeps me in his gracious Arms,Where Heav'n itself is found.CCLXXXI. A filial Temper the Work of the Spirit, and a Proof of Adoption. Galat. iv. 6.1SOV'REIGN of all the Worlds on high,Allow my humble Claim;Nor, while a Worm would raise its Head,Disdain a Father's Name.2My Father GOD! How sweet the Sound!How tender, and how dear!Not all the Melody of Heav'nCould so delight the Ear.3Come, sacred Spirit, seal the NameOn mine expanding Heart;And shew, that in Jehovah's GraceI share a filial Part.4Chear'd by a Signal so divine,Unwav'ring I believe;Thou know'st I Abba, Father, cry,Nor can the Sign deceive.5On Wings of everlasting LoveThe Comforter is come;
All Terrors at his Voice disperse,And endless Pleasures bloom.CCLXXXII. Christian Sympathy. Galat. vi. 2.1HAIL, everlasting Prince of Peace!Hail, Governor divine!How gracious is thy Sceptre's Sway!What gentle Laws are thine!2His tender Heart with Love o'erflow'd,Love spoke in ev'ry Breath;Vig'rous it reign'd thro' all his Life,And triumph'd in his Death.3All these united Charms he shews,Our frozen Souls to move;This Proof of Love to him demands,That we each other love.4O be the sacred Law fulfill'dIn ev'ry Act, and Thought;Each angry Passion far remov'd,Each selfish View forgot.5Be thou, my Heart, dilated wideBy thy Redeemer's Grace;And in one Grasp of fervent LoveAll Earth and Heav'n embrace.CCLXXXIII. Blessing GOD for spiritual Blessings in CHRIST. Ephes. i. 3.1LOUD be thy Name ador'd,Thy Titles spread abroad,
Of Christ our glorious LordThe Father and the GOD!Thro' such a Son,Thy Churches Head,Thine Honours spreadO'er Worlds unknown.2Ten thousand Gifts of LoveFrom Thee thro' him descend;And bear our Souls aboveTo Joys that never end:To Heav'n they soar,Sustain'd by GOD,And thro' the RoadHis Arm adore.3Ten thousand Songs of PraiseShall by the Saviour rise,And thro' eternal DaysShall eccho round the Skies.New Shouts we'll give,And loud proclaimThe honour'd Name,By which we live.CCLXXXIV. The grand Scheme of the Gospel. Ephes. i. 9, 10, 11-.1WE sing the deep mysterious Plan,Which GOD devis'd e'er Time began;At length disclos'd in all its Light.We bless the wond'rous Birth of Love,Which beams around us from above,With Grace so free, and Hope so bright.2Here has the wise eternal MindIn Christ, their common Head, conjoin'dGentiles and Jews, and Earth and Heav'n.Thro' him, from the great Father's Throne,Rivers of Bliss come rolling down,And endless Peace and Life are giv'n.3No more the awful Cherubs guardThe Tree of Life with flaming Sword,To drive asar Man's trembling Race;At Salem's pearly Gates they stand,And smiling wait (a friendly Band!)To welcome Strangers to the Place.4While we expect that glorious Sight,Love shall our Hearts with theirs unite,And ardent Hope our Bosoms raise:From Earth's dark Vale, and Tongues of Clay,To those resplendent Realms of Day,We'll try to send the sounding Praise.CCLXXXV. The heavenly Inheritance made known by the Spirit. Eph. i. 18.1COME, Thou celestial Spirit, come,And call my roving Passions home;To mine enlighten'd Eyes displayThe Heritage of heav'nly Day.2My GOD, that Heritage is Thine:How rich, how glorious, how divine!How far above all mortal Things,The little Pride of Courts and Kings.3Of endless Joy th' unbounded Store,Why is its Lustre known no more?
Away, ye Mists of envious Night,That veil Salvation from my Sight!4Shine forth, Almighty Saviour, shine;Shew the bright World, and shew it mine;Then Paradise on Earth shall spring,And mortal Worms like Angels sing.CCLXXXVI. Salvation by Grace. Eph. ii. 5.1GRACE! 'tis a charming Sound,Harmonious to my Ear!Heav'n with the Eccho shall resound,And all the Earth shall hear.2Grace first contriv'd a WayTo save rebellious Man,And all the Steps that Grace display,Which drew the wond'rous Plan.3Grace taught my wand'ring FeetTo tread the heav'nly Road,And new Supplies each Hour I meet,While pressing on to GOD.4Grace all the Work shall crownThro' everlasting Days;It lays in Heav'n the topmost Stone,And well deserves the Praise.CCLXXXVII. Christians risen and exalted with CHRIST to heavenly Places. Eph. ii. 5, 6.1STUPENDOUS Grace! and can it beDesign'd for Rebels such as we?
O let our ardent Praises rise,High as our Hopes beyond the Skies!2This Flesh, by righteous Vengeance slain,Might ever in the Dust remain:These guilty Spirits sent to dwell'Midst all the Flames and Fiends evil Spirits. of Hell.3But lo! incarnate Love descends;Down to the Sepulchre it bends;Rising, it tears the Bars away,And springs to its own native Day.4Then was our Sepulchre unbar'd;Then was our Path to Glory clear'd;Then, if that Saviour be our own,Did we ascend a heav'nly Throne.5A Moment shall our Joy compleat,And fix us in that shining Seat,Bought by the Pangs our Lord endur'd,And by unchanging Truth secur'd.6O may that Love, in Strains sublime,Be sung to the last Hour of Time!And let Eternity confess,Thro' all its Rounds, the matchless Grace.CCLXXXVIII. Nearness to GOD thro' CHRIST. Eph. ii. 13.1AND are we now brought near to God,Who once at Distance stood?And to effect this glorious ChangeDid Jesus shed his Blood?2O for a Song of ardent PraiseTo bear our Souls above!What should allay our lively Hope,Or damp our flaming Love?3Draw us, O LORD, with quick'ning Grace,And bring us yet more near;Here may we see thy Glories shine,And taste thy Mercies here.4O may that Love, which spread thy Board,Dispose us for the Feast;May Faith behold a smiling GODThro' Jesus' bleeding Breast.5Fir'd with the View, our Souls shall riseIn such a Scene as this,And view the happy Moment near,That shall compleat our Bliss.CCLXXXIX. The Institution of a Gospel-Ministry from CHRIST. Eph. iv. 11, 12.For an Ordination.1FATHER of Mercies, in thine HouseSmile on our Homage, and our Vows;While with a grateful Heart we shareThese Pledges of our Saviour's Care.2The Saviour, when to Heav'n he roseIn splendid Triumph o'er his Foes,Scatter'd his Gifts on Men below,And wide his royal Bounties flow.3Hence sprung th' Apostles honour'd Name,Sacred beyond heroick Fame;Hence dictates the Prophetick Sage;And hence the Evangelick Page.4In lowlier Forms to bless our EyesPastors from hence, and Teachers rise;Who, tho' with feebler Rays they shine,Still gild a long-extended Line.5From Christ their varied Gifts derive,And fed by Christ their Graces live:While, guarded by his potent Hand,'Midst all the Rage of Hell they stand.6So shall the bright Succession runThro' the last Courses of the Sun;While unborn Churches by their CareShall rise and flourish large and fair.7Jesus our Lord their Hearts shall know,The Spring, whence all these Blessings flow:Pastors and People shout his PraiseThro' the long Round of endless Days.CCXC. CHRIST the Head of the Church. Eph. iv. 15, 16.1JESUS, I sing thy matchless Grace,That calls a Worm thine own;Gives me among thy Saints a PlaceTo make thy Glories known.2Allied to Thee our vital Head,We act, and grow, and thrive:
From Thee divided, each is dead,When most he seems alive.3Thy Saints on Earth, and those aboveHere join in sweet Accord;One Body all in mutual Love,And Thou, our common Lord.4O may my Faith each Hour deriveThy Spirit with Delight;While Death and Hell in vain shall striveThis Bond to disunite.5Thou the whole Body wilt presentBefore thy Father's Face;Nor shall a Wrinkle or a SpotIts beauteous Form disgrace.CCXCI. Love to others urged from CHRIST'S Love in giving himself a Sacrifice. Eph. v. 2.1NOW be that Sacrifice survey'd,That Ransom which the Saviour paid;That Sight familiar to my View,Yet always wond'rous, always new.2The Lamb of GOD, that groan'd and bled,And gently bow'd his dying Head;While Love to Sinners fir'd his Heart,And conquer'd all the killing Smart.3Blest Jesus, while thy Grace I sing,What grateful Tribute shall I bring,That Earth and Heav'n and Thou mayst seeMy Love to him, who died for me?4That Off'ring, Lord, thy Word hath taught,Nor be thy new Command forgot,That, if their Master's Death can move,Thy Servants should each other love.5When to thy sacred Cross we fly,There let each savage Passion die;While the warm Streams of Blood divineMelt our cold Hearts to Love like thine.CCXCII. The Wisdom of redeeming Time. Eph. v. 15, 16.1GOD of Eternity, from TheeDid Infant Time his Being draw;Moments and Days and Months and YearsRevolve by thine unvaried Law.2Silent and slow they glide away;Steady and strong the Current flows,Lost in Eternity's wild Sea,The boundless Gulf, from whence it rose.3With it the thoughtless Sons of MenBefore the rapid Stream are borneOn to that everlasting Home,Whence not one Soul can e'er return.4Yet while the Shore on either SidePresents a gaudy flatt'ring Shew,We gaze, in fond Amazement lost,Nor think to what a World we go.5Great Source of Wisdom, teach my HeartTo know the Price of ev'ry Hour;
That Time may bear me on to JoysBeyond its Measure, and its Pow'r.CCXCIII. CHRIST'S Love to the Church in giving himself for it, &c. Eph. v. 25, 26, 27.1BRidegroom of Souls, how rich thy Love!How gen'rous, how divine!Our inmost Hearts it well may move,While thus our Voices join.2Deform'd and wretched once we lay,Worthy thy Hate and Scorn;Yet Love like thine could find a WayTo rescue and adorn.3Thou art our Ransom; from thy VeinsA wond'rous Fountain flowsTo wash thy Bride from all her Stains,And heal our deepest Woes.4Transform'd by thee, ev'n here belowThy Church is bright and fair:But O! how glorious shall she shew,When Jesus shall appear!5Thine Eye shall all her Form surveyWith infinite Delight,Confess'd, in that illustrious Day,Unblemish'd in thy Sight.CCXCIV. CHRIST'S Service, the Fruit of our Labours on Earth. Phil. i. 22.1MY gracious Lord, I own thy RightTo ev'ry Service I can pay;
And call it my supreme DelightTo hear thy Dictates and obey.2What is my Being, but for Thee,Its sure Support, its noblest End?Thine ever-smiling Face to see,And serve the Cause of such a Friend?3I would not breathe for worldly Joy,Or to increase my worldly Good;Nor future Days or Pow'rs employTo spread a sounding Name abroad.4'Tis to my Saviour I would live;To Him, who for my Ransom died,Nor could untainted Eden giveSuch Bliss, as blossoms at his Side.5His Work my hoary Age shall bless,When youthful Vigour is no more;And my last Hour of Life confessHis Love hath animating Pow'r.CCXCV. The Happiness of departing, and being with CHRIST. Phil. i. 23.1WHILE on the Verge of Life I stand,And view the Scene on either Hand,My Spirit struggles with its Clay,And longs to wing its Flight away.2Where Jesus dwells my Soul would be;It saints my much-lov'd Lord to see:Earth, twine no more about my Heart,For 'tis far better to depart.3Come, ye angelick Envoys Messengers, Embassadors., come,And lead the willing Pilgrim home:Ye know the Way to Jesus' Throne,Source of my Joys, and of your own.4That blessed Interview, how sweet!To fall transported at his Feet!Rais'd in his Arms to view his Face,Thro' the full Beamings of his Grace!5To see Heav'ns shining Courtiers round,Each with immortal Glories crown'd!And, while his Form in each I trace,Belov'd, and loving all t' embrace!6As with a Seraph's Voice to sing!To fly as on a Cherub's Wing!Performing with unwearied HandsA present Saviour's high Commands!7Yet with these Prospects full in Sight,I'll wait thy Signal for my Flight;For, while thy Service I persue,I find my Heav'n begun below.CCXCVI. Pressing on in the Christian Race. Phil. iii. 12-14.1AWAKE, my Soul, stretch ev'ry Nerve,And press with Vigour on:A heav'nly Race demands thy Zeal,And an immortal Crown.2A Cloud of Witnesses aroundHold thee in full Survey:Forget the Steps already trod,And onward urge thy Way.3'Tis GOD'S all-animating Voice,That calls thee from on high;'Tis his own Hand presents the PrizeTo thine aspiring Eye.4That Prize with peerless Glories bright,Which shall new Lustre boast,When Victors Wreaths Crowns or Garlands given to Conquerors. and Monarchs Gem.Shall blend in common Dust.5Blest Saviour, introduc'd by theeHave I my Race begun;And crown'd with Vict'ry at thy FeetI'll lay mine Honours down.CCXCVII. GOD supplying the Necessities of his People. Phil. iv. 19, 20.1MY GOD, how chearful is the Sound,How pleasant to repeat?Well may that Heart with Pleasure bound,Where GOD hath fix'd his Seat?2What Want shall not our GOD supplyFrom his redundant Stores?What Streams of Mercy from on highAn Arm almighty pours?3From Christ, the ever-living Spring,These ample Blessings flow:
Prepare, my Lips, his Name to sing,Whose Heart hath lov'd us so.4Now to our Father and our GODBe endless Glory giv'n,Thro' all the Realms of Man's Abode,And thro' the highest Heav'n.CCXCVIII. Thanks for being made meet for the heavenly Inheritance. Coloss. i. 12.1ALL-Glorious GOD, what Hymns of PraiseShall our transported Voices raise?What flaming Love and Zeal is due,While Heav'n stands open to our View?2Once we were fall'n, and O how low!Just on the Brink of endless Woe;Doom'd to a Heritage in Hell,Where Sinners all in Darkness dwell.3But lo, a Ray of chearful LightScatters the horrid Shades of Night!Lo, what triumphant Grace is shewnTo Souls impov'rish'd and undone!4Far, far beyond these mortal ShoresA bright Inheritance is ours;Where Saints in Light our Coming waitTo share their holy blissful State.5If ready drest for Heav'n we shine,Thine are the Robes, the Crown is thine:May endless Years their Course prolong,While "Thine the Praise" is all our Song.CCXCIX. Angels and Christians united in CHRIST as their common Head. Coloss. ii. 10.1HAIL to Emanuel's ever-honour'd Name!Spread it, ye Angels, thro' Heav'n's sacred Frame.Ye scepter'd Cherubim, before his Throne,And flaming Seraphim, bow humbly down.He is your Head; With prostrate Awe adore him,And lay with Joy your radiant Crowns before him.2Array'd in his refulgent Beams ye shine,And draw Existence Being, or Life. from his Source divine;Grateful ye wait the Signal of his Hand,Honour'd too highly by his least Command:In him th' indwelling Deity admiring,And to his brighter Image still aspiring.3Mortals with you in chearful Homage join,And bring their Anthems to Emanuel's Shrine;Mean as we are, with Sins and Griefs beset,We glory, that in him we are compleat.He is our Head, and we with you adore him,And pour our wants, our joys, our hearts before him.4We sing the Blood, that ransom'd us from Hell;We sing the Graces, that in Jesus dwell;Led by his Spirit, guarded by his Hand,Our Hopes anticipate your goodly Land;Still his incarnate Deity admiring,And with Heav'ns Hierarchy the several Orders of Angels. in Praise conspiring.CCC. Christians, as risen with CHRIST, exhorted to seek Things above. Coloss. iii. 1.1HEARKEN, ye Children of your GOD;Ye Heirs of Glory, hear;For Accents so divine as theseMight charm the dullest Ear.2Baptiz'd into your Saviour's DeathYour Souls to Sin must die;With Christ your Lord ye live anew,With Christ ascend on high.3There at his Father's Hand he sitsEnthron'd divinely fair;Yet owns himself your Brother still,And your Forerunner there.4Rise from these earthly Trifles, riseOn Wings of Faith and Love;Jesus your choicest Treasure lies,And be your Hearts, above.5But Earth and Sin will drag us down,When we attempt to fly;LORD, send thy strong attractive ForceTo raise and fix us high.CCCI. The Prosperity of the Church, the Life of a faithful Minister. 1 Thess. iii. 8.1BLEST Jesus, bow thine Ear,While we intreat thy Love;O come, and all our Hearts possess,And our best Passions move.2May we stand fast in Thee,Tho' Storms and Tempests beat;And in thy Guardian Arms obtainA calm and safe Retreat.3Still be thy Truth maintain'd,And still thy Word obey'd,And to the Merits of thy BloodA constant Homage paid.4So shall thy Shepherds live,And raise their chearful Head,And in such Blessings on their FlockConfess their Toils repaid.CCCII. Comfort on the Death of pious Friends 1 Thess. iv. 17, 18.1TRansporting Tidings which we hear!What Musick to the pious Ear!Christ loves each humble Saint so well,He with his Lord shall ever dwell.2Blest Jesus, Source of ev'ry Grace,From far to view thy smiling Face,While absent thus by Faith we live,Exceeds all Joys, that Earth can give.3But O! what Extacy unknownFills the wide Circle round thy Throne,Where ev'ry rapt'rous Hour appearsNobler than Millions of our Years!4Millions by Millions multipliedShall ne'er thy Saints from thee divide;
But the bright Legions live and praiseThro' all thine own immortal Days.5O happy Dead, in Thee that sleep,While o'er their mould'ring Dust we weep!O faithful Saviour, who shalt comeThat Dust to ransom from the Tomb!6While thine unerring Word impartsSo rich a Cordial to our Hearts,Thro' Tears our Triumphs shall be shown,Tho' round their Graves, and near our own.CCCIII. CHRIST glorified and admired in his Saints at the great Day. 2 Thess. i. 10.1YE Heav'ns, with Sounds of Triumph ring;Ye Angels, burst into a Song;Jesus descends, victorious King,And leads his shining Train along.2Ye Saints that sleep in Dust, arise;Let Joy re-animate your Clay;Spring to your Saviour thro' the Skies,And round his Throne your Homage pay.3Then let the Sons of Heav'n draw nigh,While to th' astonish'd Hosts you tell,How feeble Mortals rose so highFrom Graves and Worms, from Sin and Hell.4Tell them, in Accents like their own,What an incarnate God could do;Then point to Jesus on the Throne,And boast, that Jesus died for you.5Transported, they no more can hear;Their Voices catch the sacred Name;Harmonious to his Father's Ear,Jesus the God, their Harps proclaim.6Sin hath its dire dreadful. Incursions made,That Thou might'st prove thy Pow'r to save;And Death its Ensigns wide display'd,That Thou might'st triumph o'er the Grave.CCCIV. CHRIST seen of Angels. 1 Tim. iii. 16.1O Ye immortal ThrongOf Angels round the Throne,Join with our feeble SongTo make the Saviour known:On Earth ye knewHis wond'rous Grace,His beauteous FaceIn Heav'n ye view.2Ye saw the Heav'n-born ChildIn human Flesh array'd,Benevolent and mild,While in the Manger laid;And Praise to GOD,And Peace on Earth,For such a Birth,Proclaim'd aloud.3Ye in the WildernessBeheld the Tempter spoil'd,Well known in ev'ry Dress,In ev'ry Combat foil'd;
And joy'd to crownThe Victor's Head,When Satan fledBefore his Frown.4Around the bloody TreeYe press'd with strong Desire,That wond'rous Sight to see,The Lord of Life expire;And, could your EyesHave known a Tear,Had drop'd it thereIn sad Surprize.5Around his sacred TombA willing Watch ye keep;Till the blest Moment comeTo rouse him from his Sleep:Then roll'd the Stone,And all ador'dYour rising LordWith Joy unknown.6When all array'd in LightThe shining Conqu'ror rode,Ye hail'd his rapt'rous FlightUp to the Throne of GOD;And wav'd aroundYour golden Wings,And struck your StringsOf sweetest Sound.7The warbling Notes persue,And louder Anthems raise;While Mortals sing with youTheir own Redeemer's Praise;
And thou, my Heart,With equal Flame,And Joy the same,Perform thy Part.CCCV. The Stability of the divine Foundation, and its double Inscription. 2 Tim. ii. 19.1TO Thee, great Architect on high,Immortal Thanks be paid,Who, to support thy sinking Saints,This firm Foundation laid.2Fix'd on a Rock thy Gospel stands,And braves defies. the Rage of Hell;And, while the Saviour's Hand protects,His Blood cements it well.3Here will I build my final Hope;Here rest my weaty Soul;Majestick shall the Fabrick Building. rise,Till Glory crown the whole.4Deep on my Heart, All-gracious LORD,Engrave its double Seal;Which, while it speaks thy honour'd Name,Its sacred Use may tell.5Dear by a thousand tender BondsThy Saints to Thee are known;And, conscious what a Name they bear,Iniquity they shun.CCCVI. Persecution to be expected by every true Christian. 2 Tim. iii. 12.1GREAT Leader of thine Israel's Host,We shout thy conqu'ring Name;Legions of Foes beset Thee round,And Legions fled with Shame.2A Vict'ry glorious and compleatThou by thy Death didst gain;So in thy Cause may we contend,And Death itself sustain.3By our illustrious Gen'ral fir'd,We no Extremes would fear;Prepar'd to struggle and to bleed,If thou, our Lord, be near.4We'll trace the Footsteps thou hast drawnTo Triumph and Renown;Nor shun thy Combate and thy Cross,May we but share thy Crown.CCCVII. The Christian Scheme of Salvation worthy of GOD. Hebrews ii. 10.1IMMORTAL GOD, on Thee we call,The great Original of all;Thro' Thee we are, to Thee we tend,Our sure Support, our glorious End.2We praise that wise mysterious Grace,That pitied our revolted Race,And Jesus, our victorious Head,The Captain of Salvation made.3He, thine eternal Love decreed,Should many Sons to Glory lead;And sinful Worms to him are giv'n,A Colony to people Heav'n.4Jesus for us, (O gracious Name!)Encounter'd Agony and Shame:Jesus, the glorious and the great,Was by dire dreadful. Suff'rings made compleat.5A Scene of Wonders here we see,Worthy thy Son, and worthy Thee:And while this Theme employs our Tongues,All Heav'n unites its sweetest Songs.CCCVIII. Satan and Death conquered by the Death of CHRIST. Heb. ii. 14, 15.1SATAN, the dire Invader, cameOur new-made World t'annoy:And Death march'd dreadful in his RearHis Captives to destroy.2Caught in his Snares our Father sunk;With him his Children fell;And Death his fatal Shaft Arrow. prepar'dTo smite them down to Hell.3Jesus with pitying Eye beheld,And left his starry Crown;Turn'd his own Weapons on the Foe,And mow'd his Legions down.4By Death the Saviour Death disarm'd,That we in Light may shine;And fix'd this great mysterious Law,That Dust should Dust refine.5No more the pointed Shaft we fear,Nor dread the Monster's Boast;No more the pious Dead we mourn,As Friends for ever lost.6Their Tongues, Great Prince of Life, shall joinWith our recover'd Breath,And all th'immortal Hosts, t' ascribeOur Vict'ry to thy Death.CCCIX. An immediate Attention to GOD's Voice required. Heb. iii. 15.1THE LORD Jehovah calls,Be ev'ry Ear inclin'd;May such a Voice awake each Heart,And captivate the Mind.2If He in Thunder speaks,Earth trembles at his Nod;But gentle Accents here proclaimThe condescending GOD.3O harden not your Hearts,But hear his Voice To-day;Lest, e'er To-morrow's earliest Dawn,He call your Souls away.4Almighty GOD, pronounceThe Word of conqu'ring Grace;
So shall the Flint dissolve to Tears,And Scorners seek thy Face.CCCX. The eternal Sabbath. Heb. iv. 9.1LORD of the Sabbath, hear our VowsOn this thy Day, in this thy House;And own, as grateful Sacrifice,The Songs, which from the Desart rise.2Thine earthly Sabbaths, LORD, we love;But there's a nobler Rest above;To that our lab'ring Souls aspireWith ardent Pangs of strong Desire.3No more Fatigue, no more Distress;Nor Sin nor Hell shall reach the Place;No Groans to mingle with the Songs,Which warble from immortal Tongues.4No rude Alarms of raging Foes;No Cares to break the long Repose;No midnight Shade, no clouded Sun,But sacred high eternal Noon.5O long-expected Day, begin;Dawn on these Realms of Woe and Sin:Fain would we leave this weary Road,And sleep in Death to rest with GOD.CCCXI. CHRIST our Forerunner, and the Foundation of our Hope. Heb. vi. 19, 20.1JESUS the Lord our Souls adore,A painful Suff'rer now no more;
High on his Father's Throne he reignsO'er Earth, and Heav'n's extensive Plains.2His Race for ever is compleat;For ever undisturb'd his Seat;Myriads of Angels round him fly,And sing his well-gain'd Victory.3Yet 'midst the Honours of his Throne,He joys not for himself alone;His meanest Servants share their Part,Share in that royal tender Heart.4Raise, raise, my Soul, thy raptur'd SightWith sacred Wonder and Delight;Jesus thine own Forerunner seeEnter'd beyond the Veil for thee.5Loud let the howling Tempest yell,And foaming Waves to Mountains swell,No Shipwreck can my Vessel fear,Since Hope hath fix'd its Anchor here.CCCXII. The evil Conscience purified by the Blood of JESUS. Heb. ix. 13, 14.1BLest be the Lamb, whose Blood was spiltTo sprinkle Conscience from its Guilt;To ease its Pains, to calm its Fears,And purchase Grace for future Years.2Cleans'd by this all-atoning BloodWe joy in free Access to GOD,The living GOD, before whose FaceSinners in vain shall seek a Place.3Rouse thee, my Soul, to serve him stillWith cordial Love, with active Zeal:Serve him, like his own Son divine,Who made his Life the Price of thine.4Blest Jesus, introduc'd by Thee,The Father's smiling Face I see;And strengthen'd by thy Grace alone,These grateful Services are done.5Then must my Debt from Day to DayGrow with each Service that I pay;So grows my Joy, Dear Lord, to beThus more and more in Debt to Thee.CCCXIII. Death and Judgment appointed to all. Heb. ix. 27.1HEAV'N has confirm'd the great Decree,That Adam's Race must die:One gen'ral Ruin sweeps them down,And low in Dust they lie.2Ye living Men, the Tomb survey,Where you must quickly dwell;Hark how the awful Summons soundsIn ev'ry Fun'ral Knell!3Once you must die, and once for all;The solemn Purport weigh;For know, that Heav'n and Hell are hungOn that important Day.4Those Eyes, so long in Darkness veil'd,Must wake the Judge to see,
And ev'ry Word, and ev'ry ThoughtMust pass his Scrutiny.5O may I in the Judge beholdMy Saviour and my Friend,And far beyond the Reach of DeathWith all his Saints ascend.CCCXIV. CHRIST'S second Appearance, &c. Heb. ix. 28.1BEHOLD the Son of GOD appears,And in his Flesh our Sins he bears;The Victim at GOD'S Altar stoodTo expiate Guilt by Groans and Blood.2But lo, a second Time he comesTo shake the Earth, and rend the Tombs;These Heav'ns before him melt away,And Sun and Stars in Smoke decay.3Yet 'midst this gen'ral Wreck and Dread,Ye Saints, with Triumph lift the Head;With glad Surprize your Saviour meet,Who comes to make your Bliss compleat.4My Soul, an Happiness so greatWith pleasing Expectation wait;And while I dwell upon the Thought,Be Earth and all its Toys forgot.5My Saviour GOD, what Grace is thine,Which gives a Prospect so divine!Come, blessed Day, and teach our TonguesHow Angels warble out their Songs.CCCXV. Liberty to enter thro' the Veil by the Blood of CHRIST. Heb. x. 19-22.1APPROACH, ye Children of your GOD;Fav'rites of Heav'n, draw near;Enter the Holiest with Delight,Tho' his own Ark be there.2Pass thro' the Veil, the Saviour's Flesh,That new and living Way,And Majesty enshrin'd surrounded with and softned by. in LoveShall gentle Beams display.3Jesus with Sin-atoning BloodThe Throne hath sprinkled o'er;His fragrant Incense spreads its Cloud,And Justice flames no more.4Approach with Boldness and with Joy,But spotless all draw near;Pure be your Lives from ev'ry Stain,And ev'ry Conscience clear.5So shall the Blessings of his GraceOn all your Souls distill,Till each a royal Priest appearsOn his celestial Hill.CCCXVI. GOD's Fidelity to his Promises. Heb. x. -23.1THE Promises I sing,Which sov'reign Love hath spoke;
Nor will th' eternal KingHis Words of Grace revoke;They stand secure,And stedfast still;Not Zion's HillAbides so sure.2The Mountains melt awayWhen once the Judge appears,And Sun and Moon decay,That measure Mortals Years;But still the sameIn radiant LinesThe Promise shinesThro' all the Flame.3Their Harmony shall soundThro' mine attentive Ears,When Thunders cleave the Ground,And dissipate the Spheres;'Midst all the ShockOf that dread SceneI stand serene,Thy Word my Rock.CCCXVII. The Day approaching, a Motive to Love and Worship. Heb. x. 24. 25.1THE Day approacheth, O my Soul,The great decisive Day,Which from the Verge of mortal LifeShall bear thee far away.2Another Day more awful dawns;And lo, the Judge appears;
Ye Heav'ns, retire before his Face,And sink, ye darken'd Stars.3Yet does one short preparing Hour,One precious Hour remain;Rouse thee, my Soul, with all thy Pow'r,Nor let it pass in vain.4With me my Brethren soon must die,And at that Bar appear;Now be our Intercourse improv'dTo mutual Comfort here.5For this, thy Temple, LORD, we throng;For this, thy Board surround;Here may our Service be approv'd,And in thy Presence crown'd.CCCXVIII. Abraham's Faith in leaving his Country at the divine Command. Heb. xi. 8.1NOW let our Songs proclaim abroadTh' unchanging Name of Abram's GOD;In him let Abram's Children boast,Their Father's ever-living LORD,His Shield, his Friend, his great Reward,Who never can deceive their Trust.2Call'd by thy Voice, with joyful SpeedHe went, where thou wast pleas'd to lead,Unknowing in the Path he trod;His Land, his Kindred strove in vainThe pious Pilgrim to detain,Propt on the Promise of his GOD.3So at thy Word the Saint foregoesEach tender Tie, which Nature knows,And hears no other Voice but thine;Marches, where thou shalt point the Way,Where thou shalt pitch his Tent, will stay,And learns his Isaac to resign.4At length, still faithful to thine own,Thou call'st him to a World unknown,Thro' Paths untrod by mortal Feet;Smiling he owns thy Voice in Death,Gives to the Air his fleeting Breath,And finds the Road to Abram's Seat.CCCXIX. The GOD of the Patriarchs preparing them a City. Heb. xi. 16.1I Am thy GOD, JEHOVAH saidTo Abram, and his chosen Seed;And still the same Relation ownsTo each of Abram's faithful Sons.2Sov'reign of Heav'n, what Works of LoveSo grand a Title shall approve?What splendid Gifts will GOD bestow,That all its high Import may know?3Not the rich Flocks and Herds that feedRound Abram's Tents in Mamre's Mead,Not Joseph's Chariot, nor the Throne,Iv'ry and Gold of Solomon.4Not Canaan's Plains a Lot can proveProportion'd to Jehovah's Love;
Not Zion's sacred Mountain, whereHis Temple glitter'd like a Star.5O'er Zion's Mount, o'er Canaan's Plains,Oppression now, and Horror reigns;And where the Throne of David stood,His ruin'd Sepulchre is view'd.6'Tis in the Heav'n of Heav'ns aloneThou mak'st thy wond'rous Friendship known;A City there thy Hand prepares,Fix'd, as thine own eternal Years.7Long as they reign before thy Face,The blissful Nations shall confess,Thy sov'reign Love has there bestow'dSalvation worthy of a GOD.CCCXX. Moses's wise Choice. Heb. xi. 26.1MY Soul, with all thy waken'd Pow'rsSurvey the heav'nly Prize;Nor let these glitt'ring Toys of EarthAllure thy wand'ring Eyes.2The splendid Crown, which Moses sought,Still beams around his Brow;Tho' soon great Pharoah's scepter'd PrideWas taught by Death to bow.3The Joys and Treasures of a DayI chearfully resign;Rich in that large immortal Store,Secur'd by Grace divine.4Let Fools my wiser Choice deride,Angels and GOD approve;Nor Scorn of Men, nor Rage of HellMy stedfast Soul shall move.5With ardent Eye that bright RewardI daily will survey;And in the blooming Prospect loseThe Sorrows of the Way.CCCXXI. Acting, as seeing him, who is Invisible. Heb. xi.-27.1ETERNAL, and Immortal King,Thy peerless unequalled. Splendors none can bear,But Darkness veils Seraphick Eyes,When GOD with all his Lustre's there.2Yet Faith can pierce the awful Gloom,The great Invisible can see;And with its Tremblings mingle JoyIn fix'd Regards, Great GOD, to Thee.3Then ev'ry tempting Form of Sin,Sham'd in thy Presence, disappears;And all the glowing raptur'd SoulThe Likeness it contemplates wears.4O Ever-conscious to my Heart,Witness to its supreme Desire,Behold it presseth on to Thee,For it hath caught the heav'nly Fire.5This one Petition would it urge,To bear Thee ever in its Sight;
In Life, in Death, in Worlds unknown,Its only Portion and Delight.CCCXXII. Subjection to GOD, the Father of our Spirits. Heb. xii.-9.1ETERNAL Source of Life and Thought,Be all beneath thyself forgot;Whilst Thee, great Parent-Mind, we ownIn prostrate Homage round thy Throne.2Whilst in themselves our Souls surveyOf Thee some faint reflected Ray,They wond'ring to their Father rise;His Pow'r how vast! His Thoughts how wise!3Behold us as thine Offspring, LORD,And do not cast us off abhor'd;Nor let thy Hand, so long our Joy,Be rais'd in Vengeance to destroy.4O may we live before thy Face,The willing Subjects of thy Grace;And thro' each Path of Duty moveWith filial Awe, and filial Love.CCCXXIII. The Immutability of CHRIST Heb. xiii. 8.1WIth Transport, Lord, our Souls proclaimTh' immortal Honours of thy Name:Assembled round our Saviour's ThroneWe make his ceaseless Glories known.2High on his Father's royal SeatOur Jesus shone divinely great,E'er Adam's Clay with Life was warm'd,Or Gabriel's nobler Spirit form'd.3Thro' all succeeding Ages HeThe same hath been, the same shall be:Immortal Radiance gilds his Head,While Stars and Suns wax old and fade.4The same his Pow'r his Flock to guard;The same his Bounty to reward;The same his Faithfulness and LoveTo Saints on Earth, and Saints above.5Let Nature change and sink and die;Jesus shall raise his Chosen high,And fix them near his stable ThroneIn Glory changeless as his own.CCCXXIV. Watching for Souls in the View of the great Account. Heb. xiii.-17.For the Ordination of a Minister.1LET Zion's Watchmen all awake,And take th' Alarm they give;Now let them from the Mouth of GODTheir solemn Charge receive.2'Tis not a Cause of small ImportThe Pastor's Care demands;But what might fill an Angel's Heart,And fill'd a Saviour's Hands.3They watch for Souls, for which the LordDid heav'nly Bliss forego forsake, lay aside.;For Souls, which must for ever liveIn Raptures, or in Woe.4All to the great Tribunal haste,Th' Account to render there;And shouldst thou strictly mark our Faults,LORD, how should we appear?5May they that Jesus, whom they preach,Their own Redeemer see;And watch thou daily o'er their Souls,That they may watch for Thee.CCCXXV. The Christian perfected by divine Grace through CHRIST. Heb. xiii. 20, 21.1FATHER of Peace, and GOD of Love,We own thy Pow'r to save;That Pow'r, by which our Shepherd roseVictorious o'er the Grave.2We triumph in that Shepherd's Name,Still watchful for our Good;Who brought th' eternal Cov'nant down,And seal'd it with his Blood.3So may thy Spirit seal my Soul,And mould it to thy Will;That my fond Heart no more may stray,But keep thy Cov'nant still.4Still may we gain superior Strength,And press with Vigour on,Till full Perfection crown our Hopes,And fix us near thy Throne.CCCXXVI. Christians begotten to GOD as the First-Fruits of his Creatures. James i. 18.1NOW to that sov'reign Grace,Whence all our Comforts spring,Let the whole new-begotten RaceTheir chearful Praises bring.2His Will first made the Choice;His Word the Change hath wrought;In him our Father we rejoice,Nor be the Name forgot.3LORD, for this matchless Love,Thou mak'st thy Children see,May we from all thy Creatures proveAs the First-fruits to Thee.4Sacred to Thee aloneBe all these Pow'rs of mine,Then in the noblest Sense mine own,When most entirely Thine.CCCXXVII. Looking into the perfect Law of Liberty and continuing in it. James i. 25.1BEHOLD the Glass the Gospel lends,That Men themselves may view:
How free from Stain its Surface is!How polish'd, and how true!2Behold that wise, that perfect Law,Which noblest Freedom gives;O may it all our Souls refine,And sanctify our Lives!3Not with a transient Glance survey'd,And in an Hour forgot,But deep inscrib'd on ev'ry Heart,To reign o'er ev'ry Thought.4Great Author of each perfect Gift,Thy sov'reign Grace display,That these rebellious roving Pow'rsMay hearken and obey.5Inspir'd by Thee, our feeble SoulsShall pass victorious on;As the faint dawning Light improvesTo all the Blaze of Noon.CCCXXVIII. James's Advice to Sinners. James iv. 7, 8.1YE Sinners, bend your stubborn NecksBeneath the Yoke divine;In low Submission bow ye downBefore his sacred Shrine.2In pious Streams your Follies mourn,And seek his injur'd Grace;And wait with broken bleeding HeartsThe Op'nings of his Face.3Resist the Tempter's fierce Attacks,And he shall speed his Flight:Draw near to GOD, and his EmbraceShall fold you with Delight.4Ye Sinners, cleanse your spotted Hands,And purge your Hearts from Sin;Here fix your long-divided Views,And Peace shall reign within.5Blest Saviour, draw us by thy Love,And fix us by thy Pow'r;When we have felt these sweet Constraints,Our Souls shall rove no more.CCCXXIX. The Vanity of worldly Schemes inferred from the Unceriainty of Life. James iv. 13, 14, 15.1TO-MORROW, LORD, is thine,Lodg'd in thy sov'reign Hand;And if its Sun arise and shine,It shines by thy Command.2The present Moment flies,And bears our Life away;O make thy Servants truly wise,That they may live to-day.3Since on this winged HourEternity is hung,Waken by thine Almighty Pow'rThe Aged and the Young.4One Thing demands our Care;O be it still persu'd!
Lest, slighted once, the Season fairShould never be renew'd.5To Jesus may we flySwift as the Morning-Light,Lest Life's young golden Beams should dieIn sudden endless Night.CCCXXX. Rejoicing in an unseen Saviour. 1 Peter i. 8.1MINE inward Joys, suppress'd too long,Extatick burst into a Song:From Christ, tho' now unseen, they rise,And reach his Throne beyond the Skies.2His Glories strike the wond'ring SightOf all the first-born Sons of Light;Beyond the Seraphim they shine,Unrivall'd all, and all divine.3Yet mortal Worms his Friendship boast,And make his saving Name their Trust:Jesus, my Lord, I know him well;He rescu'd me from Death and Hell.4This sinful Heart from GOD estrang'dHis new-creating Pow'r hath chang'd,And, mingling with each secret Thought,Maintains the Work, which first it wrought.5He gives to see his Father's Face;He gives my Soul to thrive in Grace,And brings the Views of Glory down,The Beamings of my heav'nly Crown.6Thus entertain'd, while here belowUnspeakable my Transports grow;New Joys in swift Succession roll,And Glory fills my silent Soul.CCCXXXI. The Heart purified to Love unfeigned by the Spirit. 1 Peter i. 22.1GREAT Spirit of immortal Love,Vouchsafe our frozen Hearts to move;With Ardour strong these Breasts inflameTo all that own a Saviour's Name.2Still let the heav'nly Fire endureFervent and vig'rous, true and pure:Let ev'ry Heart and ev'ry HandJoin in the dear fraternal Band brotherly Union..3Celestial Dove, descend, and bringThe smiling Blessings on thy Wing;And make us taste those Sweets below,Which in the blissfull Mansions grow.CCCXXXII. Tasting that the Lord is gracious. 1 Pet. ii. 3.1YES, it is sweet to taste his Grace,Who bought us with his Blood;My Soul prefers the Relish stillTo all created Good.2O how I love that vital Word,Which taught me first to live!
Thirst for that uncorrupted Milk,That I may grow and thrive!3All gracious LORD, instruct us moreThy saving Gifts to know:And let our inmost Hearts rejoice,That thou hast lov'd us so.4Open thy Stores with lib'ral Hand,That we may daily feast;And let each dying Soul aroundThe sweet Salvation taste.CCCXXXIII. Coming to CHRIST as a living Stone. 1 Pet. ii. 4, 5.WITH Extasy of JoyExtoll his glorious Name,Who rais'd the spacious Earth,And rais'd our ruin'd Frame;He built the ChurchWho built the Sky,Shout and exaltHis Honours high.2See the Foundation laidBy Pow'r and Love divine;Jesus, his First-born Son,How bright his Glories shine!Low he descends,In Dust he lies,That from his TombA Church might rise.3But he for ever lives;Nor for himself alone,Each Saint new Life derivesFrom this mysterious Stone;His Influence dartsThro' ev'ry Soul,And in one HouseUnites the whole.4To him with Joy we move;In him cemented stand;The living Temple grows,And owns the Founder's Hand:That Structure, LORD,Still higher raise,Louder to soundIts Builder's Praise.5Descend, and shed abroadThe Tokens of thy Grace,And with more radiant BeamsLet Glory fill the Place;Our joyful SoulsShall prostrate fall,And own, our GODIs All in All.CCCXXXIV. CHRIST the Corner-Stone. 1 Pet. ii. 6. compared with Isaiah xxviii. 16, 17.1LORD, dost thou shew a Corner-StoneFor us to build our Hopes upon,That the fair Edifice may riseSublime in Light beyond the Skies?2We own the Work of sov'reign Love;Nor Death nor Hell those Hopes shall move,Which fix'd on this Foundation and,Laid by thine own Almighty Hand.3Thy People long this Stone have tried,And all the Pow'rs of Hell defy'd;Floods of Temptation beat in vain;Well doth this Rock the House sustain.4When Storms of Wrath around prevail,Whirlwind and Thunder, Fire and Hail,'Tis here our trembling Souls shall hide,And here securely they abide.5While they that scorn this precious Stone,Fond of some Quicksand of their own,Borne down by weighty Vengeance die,And buried deep in Ruin lie.CCCXXXV. CHRIST precious to the Believer. 1 Pet. ii. 7-.1JESUS, I love thy charming Name;'Tis Musick to mine Ear;Fain would I sound it out so loud,That Earth and Heavn should hear.2Yes, Thou art precious to my Soul,My Transport, and my Trust:Jewels to Thee are gaudy Toys,And Gold is sordid Dust.3All my capacious Pow'rs can wishIn Thee doth richly meet:
Nor to mine Eyes is Light so dear,Nor Friendship half so sweet.4Thy Grace still dwells upon my Heart,And sheds its Fragrance there;The noblest Balm of all its Wounds,The Cordial of its Care.5I'll speak the Honours of thy NameWith my last lab'ring Breath;Then speechless clasp Thee in mine Arms,The Antidote of Death.CCCXXXVI. Noah preserved in the Ark, and the Believer in CHRIST. 1 Pet. iii. 20, 21.1THE Deluge, at th' Almighty's Call,In what impetuous Streams it fell!Swallow'd the Mountains in its Rage,And swept a guilty World to Hell.2In vain the tallest Sons of PrideFled from the close-persuing Wave;Nor could their mightiest Tow'rs defend,Nor Swiftness 'scape, nor Courage save.3How dire the Wreck! How loud the Roar!How shrill the universal CryOf Millions in the last DespairRe-eccho'd from the louring Sky!4Yet Noah, humble happy Saint,Surrounded with the chosen Few,Sat in his Ark, secure from Fear,And sang the Grace that steer'd him thro.5So may I sing, in Jesus safe,While Storms of Vengeance round me fall,Conscious how high my Hopes are fix'd,Beyond what shakes this earthly Ball.6Enter thine Ark, while Patience waits,Nor ever quit that sure Retreat:Then the wide Flood, which buries Earth,Shall waft thee to a fairer Seat.7Nor Wreck nor Ruin there is seen;There not a Wave of Trouble rolls;But the bright Rainbow round the Throne Rev. iv. 3.Seals endless Life to all their Souls.CCCXXXVII. The ungodly warned of their final Appearance. 1 Pet. iv. -18.1BEHOLD GOD'S great incarnate SonIn Majesty comes flying down!Hark! for his Trumpet's awful SoundAwakes the Dead, and cleaves the Ground!2So solemn shall the Judgment be,And so severe the Scrutiny,That, by his Merit tried alone,The Saint himself would be undone.3Where then, ye Sons of Belialrebellious Men., whereWill your astonish'd Souls appear?How will ye shun his piercing Sight?Or how resist his matchless Might?4Up to the pointed Mountains fly,And gain the Confines of the Sky;There shall ye meet celestial Fire,While Mountains melt before his Ire Anger..5Call on the rending Earth to save,And in its Center search a Grave;The Judge shall well discern thee there,And drag thee trembling to his Bar.6Deck thee around with Fraud and Lyes,And put on ev'ry fair Disguise;Soon shall thy painted Form be knownAmidst ten thousand of his own.7Gird thee in Arms his Wrath t'oppose,And league with Millions of his Foes;Soon would the rebel band expire,Like crackling Thorns amidst the Fire.8One only Way may yet be found;Submissive bow ye to the Ground;His Cross a Refuge will affordFrom all the Terrors of his Sword.CCCXXXVIII. Humbling ourselves under GOD's mighty Hand. 1 Pet. v. 6.1BENEATH thy mighty Hand, O GOD,Our Souls we prostrate low;Shine forth with radiant gentle Beams,That we thy Name may know.2Thy Hand this various Frame produc'd,And still supports it well;
That Hand with Justice and with EaseMight smite our Souls to Hell.3Conscious of Meanness and of Guilt,We in the Dust would lie;Stretch forth thy condescending Arm,And lift the humble high.4So in the Temples of thy GraceWe'll sov'reign Mercy own,And, when we shine above the Stars,Extol thy Grace alone.5The more thou raise such sinful Dust,The lower would it fall;For less than nothing, LORD, are we,And Thou art All in All.CCCXXXIX. The same. For a Fast-Day.1OUr Souls with Rev'rence, LORD, bow downStruck by the Splendors of thy Throne;Humbled, while in thy House we stand,Beneath thy great tremendous Hand.2That Hand, which bears the steady Pole,While Nature's Wheels unwearied roll;That Hand, which gives each Creature Food,And fills the World with various Good:3That Hand, which pierc'd thy darling SonTo expiate Crimes, that we had done:That Hand, which scatters Grace abroadTo turn thy Foes to Sons of GOD.4But O! with what distracted RageHave we presum'd that Hand t' engage!
And, while long Patience hath been shewn,Struggled to force thy Vengeance down!5Here might thy Wrath begin to flame,And vindicate thine injur'd Name:Till the ed Thunders of thy HandHad dealt Destruction round our Land.6With humble Hearts our GOD we meet:O raise the Suppliants at thy Feet!And let that glorious Arm this DayEmbrace the Rebels it might slay.CCCXL. GOD's Care a Remedy for ours. 1 Pet. v. 7.1HOW gentle GOD'S Commands!How kind his Precepts are!"Come, cast your Burdens on the LORD,"And trust his constant Care".2While Providence supports,Let Saints securely dwell;That Hand, which bears all Nature up,Shall guide his Children well.3Why should this anxious LoadPress down your weary Mind?Haste to your heav'nly Father's Throne,And sweet Refreshment find.4His Goodness stands approv'dDown to the present Day;I'll drop my Burden at his Feet,And bear a Song away.CCCXLI. Establishment in Religion from the GOD of Grace, &c. 1 Pet. v. 10, 11.1HOW rich thy Favours, GOD of Grace!How various and divine!Full as the Ocean they are pour'd,And bright as Heav'n they shine.2He to eternal Glory calls,And leads the wondrous WayTo his own Palace, where he reignsIn uncreated Day.3Jesus, the Herald of his Love,Displays the radiant Prize,And shews the Purchase of his BloodTo our admiring Eyes.4He perfects what his Hand begins,And Stone on Stone he lays;Till firm and fair the Building rise,A Temple to his Praise.5The Songs of everlasting YearsThat Mercy shall attend,Which leads thro' Suff'rings of an HourTo Joys, that never end.CCCXLII. The Circumstances of CHRIST'S second Appearing. 2 Pet. iii. 11, 12.1MY waken'd Soul, extend thy WingsBeyond the Verge of mortal Things;See this vain World in Smoke decay,And Rocks and Mountains melt away.2Behold the fiery Deluge rollThro' Heav'n's wide Arch from Pole to Pole:Pale Sun, no more thy Lustre boast;Tremble and fall, ye starry Host.2This Wreck of Nature all around,The Angel's Shout, the Trumpet's SoundLoud the descending Judge proclaim,And eccho his tremendous Name.4Children of Adam, all appearWith Rev'rence round his awful Bar;For, as his Lips pronounce, ye goTo endless Bliss, or endless Woe.5LORD, to mine Eyes this Scene displayFrequent thro' each revolving Day,And let thy Grace my Soul prepareTo meet its full Redemption there.CCCXLIII. The Importance of being prepared for CHRIST'S second Appearing. 2 Pet. iii. 14.'BEHOLD I come, (the Saviour cries,)"With winged Speed I come;"My Voice shall call your Souls away"To their eternal Home.2"Awake, Ye Sons of Sloth, awake;"Your vain Amusements cease,"And strive with your united Pow'rs,"That ye be found in Peace.3"Seize the blest Hour with ardent Haste,"Nor slight this peaceful Word,
"Lest your affrighted Souls in vain"Fly from my flaming Sword.4"Happy the Man, whose ready Heart"Obeys the sacred Call;"And shelters in my Cov'nant-Grace"His everlasting All".5Blest Jesus, whose All-searching EyeMine inmost Pow'rs can see,Dost Thou not know my willing SoulHath lodg'd that All with Thee?6These eager Eyes thy Signal wait;My dear Redeemer, come:I rove a weary Pilgrim here,And long to be at Home.CCCXLIV. Growing in Grace, &c. 2 Pet. iii. 18.1PRAISE to thy Name, Eternal GOD,For all the Grace Thou shed'st abroad;For all thine Influence from aboveTo warm our Souls with sacred Love.2Blest be thy Hand, which from the SkiesBrought down this Plant of Paradise,And gave its heav'nly Glories Birth,To deck this Wilderness of Earth.3But why does that celestial Flow'rOpen, and thrive, and shine no more?Where are its balmy Odours fled?And why reclines its beauteous Head?4Too plain alas! the Languor shewsTh' unkindly Soil in which it grows;
Where the black Frosts and beating StormWither and rend its tender Form.5Unchanging Sun, thy Beams displayTo drive the Frosts and Storms away;Make all thy potent Virtues knownTo chear a Plant, so much thine own.6And thou, blest Spirit, deign to blowFresh Gales of Heav'n on Shrubs below;So shall they grow, and breathe abroadA Fragrance grateful to our GOD.CCCXLV. Experimental Knowledge communicated. 1 John i. 1-3.1JESUS, mine Advocate above,Let me not hear of Thee alone,But make the Wonders of thy LoveBy deep Experience sweetly known.2On Thee my Soul would fix its Eyes;My Lips would taste thy heav'nly Grace;Then would I raise thine Honours high,And teach a thousand Tongues thy Praise.3The sacred Flame from Heart to HeartShould with a rapid Progress run;Till each in GOD could boast his Part,Thro' sweet Communion with his Son.4Thus may the Servants of the LORDFeel the Salvation they proclaim;And thus may Crowds receive the Word,And eccho back the Saviour's Name.CCCXLVI. Communion with GOD and CHRIST. 1 John i. -3.1OUR heav'nly Father calls,And Christ invites us near;With both our Friendship shall be sweet,And our Communion dear.2GOD pities all my Griefs;He pardons ev'ry Day;Almighty to protect my Soul,And wise to guide my Way.3How large his Bounties are!What various Stores of GoodDiffus'd from my Redeemer's Hand,And purchas'd with his Blood!4Jesus, my living Head,I bless thy faithful Care;Mine Advocate before the Throne,And my Forerunner there.5Here fix, my roving Heart;Here wait, my warmest Love,Till the Communion be compleatIn nobler Scenes above.CCCXLVII. The Privileges of Saints by the Blood of JESUS. 1 John i. 7.1MY various Pow'rs, awakeTo sound redeeming Grace;To him, that wash'd us in his Blood,Ascribe eternal Praise.2What tho' our Guilt appearsDy'd in a Crimson Grain?The Stream, that flows from Jesus' Side,Shall purge away the Stain.3'Midst all our various FormsWe in this Center meet;Our Hearts, cemented by his Blood,Shall taste Communion sweet.4Then let us walk in Light,Like Christ, whose Name we wear;And, as the Pledge of endless Bliss,Our Father's Image bear.CCCXLVIII. The Blood of CHRIST cleansing from all Sin. 1 John i. -7.1MY Sins, alas! how foul the Stains!How deep, and O how wide!O'er my polluted Soul they spread,In double Crimson dy'd.2How shall I stand before that GOD,In whose All-piercing SightSome Shades of Darkness seem to veilThe purest Sons of Light?3Where shall I wash these Spots away,And make my Nature clean?Since Drops of penitential GriefAre tinctur'd still with Sin.4Behold a Torrent all divineFlows from the Saviour's Side,
And strangely bears a crystal StreamAmidst the purple Tide referring to the Blood and Water, that came out of Christ's wounded Side. John xix. 34..5Here will I bathe my spotted Soul,And make it pure and fair;Till not the Eye of GOD discernOne soul Pollution there.6Then, drest in Robes of snowy White,I'll join the shining Band,And learn new Anthems to the Lamb,While round his Throne we stand.CCCXLIX. Having the Son, and having Life in him. 1 John v. 12.1O Happy Christian, who can boast,"The Son of GOD is mine"!Happy, tho' humbled in the Dust,Rich in this Gift divine.2He lives the Life of Heav'n below,And shall for ever live;Eternal Streams from Christ shall flow,And endless Vigour give.3That Life we ask with bended Knee,Nor will the LORD deny;Nor will celestial Mercy seeIts humble Suppliants die.4That Life obtain'd, for Praise aloneWe wish continu'd Breath;And taught by blest Experience own,That Praise can live in Death.CCCL. CHRIST the First and the Last, humbled  Death, and exalted to an eternal Triumph over it. Revelation i. 17, 18.1WHat Myst'ries, Lord, in thee combine!Jesus, once mortal, yet divine!The First, the Last; the End, the Head;The Source of Life among the Dead.2O Love, beyond the Stretch of Thought!What matchless Wonders hath it wrought!My Faith, while she the Grace declares,Trembles beneath the Load she bears.3Hail, royal Conqu'ror o'er the Grave,Tender to pity, strong to save!For ever live, for ever reign,And prosp'rous may thy Throne remain!4Thy Saints, obedient to thy Word,With humble Joy surround thy Board;And, long as Time persues its Race,Proclaim thy Death, and shout thy Grace.5In the full Choir, where Angels joinTheir Harps of Melody divine,Thy Death inspires a Song of Praise,New thro' thy Life's eternal Days.CCCLI. The Keys of Death and the unseen World in CHRIST'S Hand. Rev. i. 18.1HAIL to the Prince of Life and Peace,Who holds the Keys of Death and Hell!
The spacious World unseen is his,And sov'reign Pow'r becomes him well.2In Shame and Torment once he died;But now he lives for evermore:Bow down, ye Saints, around his Seat,And, all ye Angel-Bands, adore.3So live for ever, Glorious Lord,To crush thy Foes, and guard thy Friends;While all thy chosen Tribes rejoice,That thy Dominion never ends.4Worthy thy Hand to hold the Keys,Guided by Wisdom, and by Love;Worthy to rule o'er mortal Life,O'er Worlds below, and Worlds above.5When Death thy Servants shall invade,When Pow'rs of Hell thy Church annoy,Controul'd by Thee, their Rage shall helpThe Cause, they labour'd to destroy.6For ever reign, victorious King:Wide thro' the Earth thy Name be known;And call my longing Soul to singSublimer Anthems near thy Throne.CCCLII. CHRIST'S Care of Ministers and Churches. Rev. ii. 1.1WE bless th' eternal Source of Light,Who makes the Stars to shine;And, thro' this dark beclouded World,Diffuseth Rays divine.2We bless the Churches sov'reign King,Whose golden Lamps we are;Fix'd in the Temples of his LoveTo shine with Radiance fair.3Still be our Purity preserv'd;Still fed with Oil the Flame;And in deep Characters inscrib'dOur heav'nly Master's Name.4Then, while between our Ranks he walksAnd all our State surveys,His Smiles shall with new Lustre deckThe People of his Praise.CCCLIII. The Christian Warrior animated and crowned. Rev. ii. 10.1HARK! 'Tis our heav'nly Leader's VoiceFrom his triumphant Seat:'Midst all the War's tumultuous Noise,How pow'rful, and how sweet!2"Fight on, my faithful Band, (he cries)"Nor fear the mortal Blow:"Who first in such a Warfare dies"Shall specdiest Vict'ry know.3"I have my Days of Combate known,"And in the Dust was laid,"But thence I mounted to my Throne,"And Glory crowns my Head.4"That Throne, that Glory you shall share;"My Hands the Crown shall give;
"And you the sparkling Honours wear,"While GOD himself shall live".5Lord, 'tis enough; our Bosoms glowWith Courage, and with Love:Thine Hand shall bear thy Soldiers thro',And raise their Heads above.6My Soul, while Deaths beset me round,Erects her ardent Eyes,And longs, thro' some illustrious Wound,To rush and seize the Prize.CCCLIV. The Pillar in GOD's heavenly Temple with its Inseription. Rev. iii. 12.1ALL-HAIL, victorious Saviour, hail!I bow to thy Command;And own, that David's roval KeyWell fits thy sov'reign Hand.2Open the Treasures of thy Love,And shed thy Gifts abroad;Unveil to my rejoicing EyesThe Temple of my GOD.3There as a Pillar let me standOn an eternal Base Foundation.;Uprear'd by thine almighty Hand,And polish'd by thy Grace.4There deep engraven let me bearThe Title of thy GOD;And mark the new Jerusalem,As my secure Abode.5In lasting Characters inscribeThine own beloved Name,That endless Ages there may readThe great Emanuel's Claim.6Lead on, my Gen'ral, I desyWhat Earth or Hell can do;Thy Conduct, and this glorious HopeShall bear thy Soldier thro'.CCCLV. GOD's Covenant unchangeable, or The Rainbow round about the Throne. Rev. iv.-3. compared with Gen. ix. 13-17.1SUPREME of Beings, with DelightOur Eyes survey this heav'nly Sight;And trace with Admiration sweetThe beaming Splendors of thy Feet.2Jasper and Sapphire strive in vainTo paint the Glories of thy Train;Thy Robes all stream eternal Light,Too pow'rful for a Cherub's Sight.3Yet round thy Throne the Rainbow shines,Fair Emblem of thy kind Designs:Bright Pledge, that speaks thy Cov'nant sureLong as thy Kingdom shall endure.4No more shall Deluges of WoeThy new-created World o'erflow;Jesus, our Sun, his Beams displays,And glids the Clouds with beauteous Rays.5No Gems so bright, no Forms so fair;Mercy and Truth still triumph there:
Thy Saints shall bless the peaceful Sign,When Stars and Suns forget to shine.6Ev'n here, while Storms and gloomy Shade,And Horrors all the Scene o'erspread,Faith views the Throne with piercing Eye,And boasts, the Rainbow still is nigh.CCCLVI. Victory over Satan by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of the Testimony of his Servants. Rev. xii. 11.1SEE the old Dragon from his ThroneSink with enormous Ruin down!Banish'd from Heav'n, and doom'd to dwellDeep in the fiery Gloom of Hell!2Ye Heav'ns with all your Hosts, rejoice:Ye Saints, in Consort lend your Voice:Approach your Lord's victorious Seat,And tread the Foe beneath your Feet.3But whence a Conquest so divineGain'd by such feeble Hands as mine?Or whence can sinful Mortals boastO'er Satan and his rebel Host?4'Twas from thy Blood, Thou slaughter'd Lamb,That all our Palms and Triumphs came;Thy Cross, thy Spear inflicts the Stroke,By which the Monster's Head is broke.5Thy faithful Word our Hope maintainsThro' all our Combate and our Pains;The Accents of thy heav'nly BreathThy Soldiers bear thro' Wounds and Death.6Triumphant Lamb, in Worlds unknown,With Transport round thy radiant Throne,Thy happy Legions, all compleat,Shall lay their Laurels at thy Feet.CCCLVII. The Song of Moses and the Lamb. Rev. xv. 3.1ISRAEL, thy Tribute bringTo GOD'S victorious Name;The Song of Moses sing,Of Moses and the Lamb:Improve his Lays Songs of Praise.;The Theme exceeds,And nobler DeedsDemand our Praise.2The Prince of Hell aroseWith impious Rage and Pride,And 'midst our num'rous FoesOur feeble Pow'r defy'd;"I will o'ertake,"And I destroy,"My Hand with Joy"Shall force thee back".3Thy Hand, Almighty LORD,Thy trembling Israel saves;Thine unresisted WordDivides the threatning Waves:Thy Hosts pass o'er;The Foe o'erthrownSinks like a StoneTo rise no more.4Our Triumphs we prepare,And chearful Anthems raise;Jehovah's Arm made bareDemands immortal Praise;And while we sing,Ye Shores, proclaimHis wondrous Name,Ye Desarts, ring.5Thro' all the WildernessThy Presence, LORD, shall lead;And bring us to the Place,Thy sov'reign Love decreed;Those blissful Plains,Where all aroundHosannas sound,And Transport reigns.CCCLVIII. The Conquest of Death and Grief by Views of the heavenly State. Rev. xxi. 4.1LIFT up, ye Saints, your weeping Eyes,Suspend your Sorrows and your Sighs;Turn all your Groans to joyful Songs,Which Jesus dictates to your Tongues.2Thus saith the Saviour from his Throne,"Behold all former Things are gone,"Past like an anxious Dream away,"Chas'd by the golden Beams of Day.3"See in celestial Pomp array'd"A new-created World display'd;"Mark with what Light its Prospects shine!"How grand, how various, how divine!4"There mine own gentle Hand shall dry"Each Tear from each o'erflowing Eye,"And open wide my friendly Breast"To lull the weary Soul to Rest.5"No more shall Grief assail your Heart,"No boding Fear, no piercing Smart;"For ever there my People dwell"Beyond the Range of Death and Hell".6Vain King of Terrors, boast no moreThine ancient wide-extended Pow'r;Each Saint in Life with Christ his HeadShall reign, when thou thyself art dead.CCCLIX. CHRIST the Root and Offspring of David, and the Morning-Star. Rev. xxii -16.1ALL-HAIL, mysterious King!Hail, David's ancient Root!Thou righteous Branch, which thence didst spring,To give the Nations Fruit.2Our weary Souls shall restBeneath thy grateful Shade;Our thirsting Lips Salvation taste;Our fainting Hearts are glad.3Fair Morning-Star, arise,With living Glories bright,And pour on these awak'ning EyesA Flood of sacred Light.4The horrid Gloom is fled,Pierc'd by thy beauteous Ray;
Shine, and our wand'ring Footsteps leadTo everlasting Day.CCCLX. CHRIST'S Invitations ecchoed back &c. Rev. xxii. 17.1HOW free the Fountain flowsOf endless Life and Joy!That Spring, which no Confinement knows,Whose Waters never cloy!2How sweet the Accents soundFrom the Redeemer's Tongue!"Assemble, all ye Nations round,"In one obedient Throng.3"The Spirit bears the Call"To all the distant Lands;"The Church, the Bride reflects it back,"While Jesus waiting stands.4"Ho, ev'ry thirsty Soul,"Approach the sacred Spring;"Drink, and your fainting Spirits chear,"Renew the Draught, and sing.5"Let all, that will, approach;"The Water freely take;"Free from mine op'ning Heart it flows,"Your raging Thirst to slake".6With thankful Hearts we comeTo taste the offer'd Grace;And call on all that hear to joinThe Trial, and the Praise.CCCLXI. The Christian rejoicing in the Views of Death and Judgment. Rev. xxii. 20.1"BEHOLD I come, (the Saviour cries)"On Wings of Love I fly"So come, Dear Lord, (my Soul replies)And bring Salvation nigh.2Come, loose these Bonds of Flesh and Sin;Come, end my Pains and Cares;Bear me to thy serene AbodeBeyond the Clouds and Stars.3I greet the Messengers of Death,By which Thou call'st me Home;But doubly greet that joyful Hour,When Thou thyself shalt come.4Come, plead thy Father's injur'd Cause,And make thy Glory shine;Come, rouse thy Servants mould'ring Dust,And their whole Frame refine.5O come amidst th' Angelick HostsTheir humble Name to own;And bear the full Assembly backTo dwell around thy Throne.6With winged Speed, Redeemer dear,Bring on th' illustrious Day:Come, lest our Spirits droop and faintBeneath thy long Delay.HYMNS ON PARTICULAR OCCASIONS, AND IN UNCOMMON MEASURES.HYMN CCCLXII. A Morning HYMN, to be used at awaking and rising.1AWAKE, my Soul, to meet the Day;Unfold thy drowsy Eyes,And burst the pond'rous Chain, that loadsThine active Faculties.2GOD'S guardian Shield was round me spreadIn my defenceless Sleep:Let him have all my waking Hours,Who doth my Slumbers keep.3[The Work of each immortal SoulAttentive Care demands;
Think then what painful Labours waitThe faithful Pastor's Hands.]4My Moments fly with winged Pace,And swift my Hours are hurl'd;And Death with rapid March comes onT' unveil th' eternal World.5I for this Hour must give AccountBefore GOD'S awful Throne;Let not this Hour neglected pass,As Thousands more have done.6Pardon, O GOD, my former Sloth,And arm my Soul with Grace;As, rising now, I seal my VowsTo prosecute thy Ways.7Bright Sun of Righteousness, arise;Thy radiant Beams display,And guide my dark bewilder'd SoulTo everlasting Day.CCCLXIII. An Evening HYMN, to be used when composing oneself to sleep.I.INTERVAL of grateful Shade,Welcome to my weary Head!Welcome Slumbers to mine Eyes,Tir'd with glaring Vanities!My great Master still allowsNeedful Periods of Repose:By my heav'nly Father blestThus I give my Pow'rs to Rest;
Heav'nly Father! gracious Name!Night and Day his Love the same:Far be each suspicious Thought,Ev'ry anxious Care forgot:Thou, mine ever-bounteous GOD,Crown'st my Days with various Good:Thy kind Eye, that cannot sleep,These defenceless Hours shall keep:Blest Vicissitude to me!Day and Night I'm still with Thee.II.What tho' downy Slumbers flee,Strangers to my Couch and me?Sleepless well I know to rest,Lodg'd within my Father's Breast.While the Empress of the NightScatters mild her Silver Light;While the vivid Planets strayVarious thro' their mystick Way;While the Stars unnumber'd rollRound the ever-constant Pole;Far above these spangled SkiesAll my Soul to GOD shall rise;'Midst the Silence of the NightMingling with those Angels bright,Whose harmonious Voices raiseCeaseless Love and ceaseless Praise:Thro' the Throng his gentle EarShall my tuneless Accents hear;From on high doth he impartSecret Comfort to my Heart.He in these serenest HoursGuides my intellectual Pow'rs,
And his Spirit doth diffuse,Sweeter far than Midnight Dews,Lifting all my Thoughts aboveOn the Wings of Faith and Love.Blest Alternative to me,Thus to sleep, or wake, with Thee!III.What if Death my Sleep invade?Should I be of Death afraid?Whilst encircled by thine Arm,Death may strike, but cannot harm.What if Beams of op'ning DayShine around my breathless Clay?Brighter Visions from on highShall regale my mental Eye.Tender Friends awhile may mournMe from their Embraces torn;Dearer better Friends I haveIn the Realms beyond the Grave.See the guardian Angels nighWait to waft my Soul on high!See the golden Gates display'd!See the Crown to grace my Head!See a Flood of sacred Light,Which no more shall yield to Night!Transitory World, farewell!Jesus calls with him to dwell.With thy heav'nly Presence blest,Death is Life, and Labour Rest.Welcome Sleep, or Death to me!Still secure, for still with Thee.CCCLXIV. On Recovery from Sickness, during which, much of the divine Favour had been experienced.1MY GOD, thy Service well demandsThe Remnant of my Days:Why was this fleeting Breath renew'd,But to renew thy Praise?2Thine Arms of everlasting LoveDid this weak Frame sustain,When Life was hov'ring o'er the Grave,And Nature sunk with Pain.3Thou, when the Pains of Death were felt,Didst chase the Fears of Hell,And teach my pale and quiv'ring LipsThy matchless Grace to tell.4Calmly I bow'd my fainting HeadOn thy dear faithful Breast;Pleas'd to obey my Father's CallTo his eternal Rest.5Into thy Hands, my Saviour GOD,Did I my Soul resign,In firm Dependence on that Truth,Which made Salvation mine.6Back from the Borders of the Grave,At thy Command I come:Nor would I urge a speedier FlightTo my celestial Home.7Where Thou determin'st mine Abode,There would I chuse to be;
For in thy Presence Death is Life,And Earth is Heav'n with Thee.CCCLXV. The last Words of David. 2 Samuel xxiii. 1-8 agreeable to the ingenious metrical Version of the learned Dr. Richard Grey.1THUS hath the Son of Jesse said,When Israel's GOD had rais'd his HeadTo high Imperial Sway:Struck with his last poetick Fire,Zion's sweet Psalmist tun'd his LyreTo this harmonious Lay.2Thus dictates Israel's sacred Rock:Thus hath the GOD of Jacob spokeBy my responsive Tongue:Behold the JUST ONE over MenCommencing his religious Reign!Great Subject of my Song.3So gently shines with genial RayTh' unclouded Lamp of rising Day,And cheers the tender Flow'rs,When Midnight's soft diffusive RainHath bless'd the Gardens and the PlainWith kind refreshing Show'rs.4Shall not my House this Honour boast?My Soul th' eternal Cov'nant trust,Well-order'd still and sure?There all my Hopes and Wishes meet;In Death I call its Blessings sweet,And feel its Bond secure.5The Sons of Belial shall not spring,Who spurn at Heav'n's appointed King,And scorn his high Command:Tho' wide the Briars infest the Ground,And the sharp-pointed Thorns aroundDefy a tender Hand;6A dreadful Warriour shall appearWith Iron Arms, and massy Spear,And tear them from their Place:Touch'd with the Lightning of his Ire,At once they kindle into Fire,And vanish in the Blaze.CCCLXVI. A MILITARY ODE. PSALM CXLIX.Probably composed by David to be sung, when his Army was marching out to War against the Remnant of the devoted Nations of Canaan, and first went up in solemn Procession to the House of GOD at Jerusalem, there, as it were, to consecrate the Arms, which he put into their Hands. The Beds referred to ver. 5, were probably the Couches, on which they lay at the Banquet attending their Sacrifices; which gives a noble Sense to a Passage, on any other Interpretation hardly intelligible.1O Praise ye the LORD, prepare a new Song,And let all his Saints in full Consort join:Ye Tribes all assemble the Feast to prolong,In solemn Procession with Musick divine.2O Israel, in him that made thee rejoice;Let all Zion's Sons exult in their King;While to martial Dances you join a glad Voice,Your lutes harps and timbrels in harmony bring.3The LORD in his Saints still finds his Delight;Salvation from him the Meek shall adorn;They well may be joyful, sustain'd by his Might,And crown'd by his favour may lift up their horn.4Let Carpets be spread, and Banquets prepar'dThose Altars around, whence Incense ascends;Whilst Anthems of Glory thro' Salem are heard,And GOD, whom we worship, indulgent attends.5Then as your Hearts bound with Musick & Wine,Inspir'd by the GOD, who reigns in the Place;Unsheath all your Weapons, and bright let them shine,And brandish your Faulchions, while chaunting his Praise.6Then march to the Field; the Heathen defy;And scatter his Wrath on Nations around:Like angels of vengeance your swords lift on highAnd boast, that Jehovah commissions the wound.7Their Gen'rals subdu'd your triumphs shall graceAnd loaded with Chains their Kings shall be brought;On the Necks shall ye trample of Canaan's proud Race,And all their last remnant for slaughter be sought.8No Rage of your own such Rigour demands;A Sentence divine your Arms must fulfill:
Of old he this vengeance consign'd to your hands,And in sacred Volumes recorded his Will.9This Honour, ye Saints, appointed for you,All-grateful receive, and faithful obey;And, while his dread Pleasure resistless ye do,Still make his high Praises the Song of the Day.CCCLXVII. For the Thanksgiving-Day for the Peace, April 25, 1749.1NOW let our Songs address the GOD of Peace,Who bids the Tumult of the Battle cease:The pointed Spears to pruning Hooks he bends,And the broad Faulchion in the Plow-share ends.His pow'rful Word unites contending NationsIn kind Embrace, and friendly Salutations.2Britain, adore the Guardian of thy State;Who, high on his celestial Throne elate,Still watchful o'er thy Safety and Repose,Frown'd on the Counsels of thy haughtiest Foes;Thy Coasts secur'd from ev'ry dire InvasionOf Fire and Sword and spreading Desolation.3When rebel bands with desp'rate madness join'd,He wafted o'er Deliv'rance with his Wind;Drove back the Tide, that delug'd half our Land,And curb'd their Fury with his mightier Hand:Till dreadful Slaughter, and the last ConfusionTaught those audacious Sinners their Delusion.4He gave our Fleets to triumph o'er the Main,And scatter Terror 'cross wide Ocean's Plain:
Opposing Leaders trembled at the Sight,Nor found their Safety in th' attempted Flight;Taught by their Bonds, how vainly they pretendedThose to distress, whom Israel's GOD defended.5Fierce Storms were summon'd up in Britain's aid,And meagre Famine hostile Lands o'erspread;By Suff'rings bow'd their Conquests they release,Nor scorn the Overtures of equal Peace:Contending Pow'rs congratulate the Blessing,Joint Hymns of Gratitude to Heav'n addressing.6While we beneath our Vines and Fig-Trees sit,Or thus within thy sacred Temple meet,Accept, Great GOD, the Tribute of our Song,And all the Mercies of this Day prolong.Then spread thy peaceful Word thro' ev'ry Nation,That all the Earth may hail thy great Salvation.CCCLXVIII. An Hymn for a Fast-Day in Time of War.1GREAT GOD of Heav'n and Nature, rise,And hear our loud united Cries:See Britain bow before thy FaceThro' all her Coasts, and seek thy Grace.2No Arm of Flesh we make our Trust;Nor Sword, nor Horse, nor Ships we boast:Thine is the Land, and thine the Main,And human Force and Skill is vain.3Our Guilt might draw thy Vengeance downOn ev'ry Shore, on ev'ry Town;But view us, LORD, with pitying Eye,And lay thy lifted Thunder by.4Forgive the Follies of our Times;And purge our Land from all its Crimes;Reform'd and deck'd with Grace divine,Let Princes Priests and People shine.5O may no GOD-provoking SinThro' all our Camps and Navies reign;No foul Reproach, to drive from thenceOur surest Glory and Defence.6So shall our GOD delight to bless,And crown our Arms with wide Success:Our Foes shall dread JEHOVAH'S Sword,And conqu'ring Britain shout the LORD.CCCLXIX. Thanksgiving for National Deliverance, and Improvement of it.1SALVATION doth to GOD belong;His Pow'r and Grace shall be our Song;His Hand hath dealt a secret Blow,And Terror strikes the haughty Foe.2Praise to the LORD, who bows his EarPropitious to his People's Pray'r;And, tho' Deliv'rance long delay,Answers in his well-chosen Day.3O may thy Grace our Land engage,(Rescu'd from fierce tyrannic Rage,)The Tribute of its Love to bringTo Thee, our Saviour, and our King!4Our Temples, guarded from the Flame,Shall eccho thy triumphant Name;
And ev'ry peaceful private HomeTo Thee a Temple shall become.5Still be it our supreme DelightTo walk as in thy honour'd Sight:Still in thy Precepts and thy FearTo Life's last Hour to persevere.CCCLXX. A Church seeking Direction from God in the Choice of a Pastor.1SHEPHERD of Israel, bend thine Ear,Thy Servants Groans indulgent hear;Perplex'd, distress'd, to Thee we cry,And seek the Guidance of thine Eye.2Thy comprehensive View surveysOur wand'ring Paths, our trackless Ways;Send forth, O LORD, thy Truth and Light,To guide our doubtful Footsteps right.3With longing Eyes, behold, we waitIn suppliant Crouds at Mercy's Gate:Our drooping Hearts, O GOD, sustain:Shall Israel seek thy Face in vain?4O LORD, in Ways of Peace return,Nor let thy Flock neglected mourn;May our blest Eyes a Shepherd see,Dear to our Souls, and dear to Thee.5Fed by his Care, our Tongues shall raiseA chearful Tribute to thy Praise;Our Children learn the grateful Song,And theirs the chearful Notes prolong.THE END.AN INDEX, OR TABLE to find an HYMN by the TITLE or CONTENTS of it, or an HYMN suited to PARTICULAR SUBJECTS and OCCASIONS.N. B. The Figures refer to the Hymns.AAARON'S Breastplate 8.Abiding in Christ 237, 238.ABRAHAM'S Care of his Family 2. Faith in leaving his Country 318. God, his God 319. Intercession for Sodom 3.Absence of God dreadful 18, 157.Activity in Religion 199, 210. rewarded 172.ADAM, the First and Second 270.Adopting Love 124, 281.Afflictions, improved 159. moderated 92. salutary 143. submitted to 42. succeeded by Joy 66. by Rest and Happiness in Heaven 212, 310, 358.Angels, Christ seen of them 304. their Head 299. Reply to those who sought Christ 194. Song at Christ's Birth 200, 201.Appeal to Christ for the Sincerity of Love to him 246.
Ark, the godly Man's 90. Noah saved in it, an Emblem of the Believer's Safety in Christ 336.BBAcksliders, their Ingratitude 191. invited to return 122. God's Pity for them 153. recollecting themselves 149.Blessing of God necessary and desired 53.Blessings, spiritual acknowledged 283. temporal, God's Readiness to give them argued 261.Blood of Christ, admitting to the Holiest 315. cleansing from Sin 348. conquering Satan 356. conveying Blessings 347. purifying 312.BRITAIN, God intreated for it 120. his Controversy with it 158. unreformed by Deliverances 140, 155.CCAptives of Sin lamented 129. Care, anxious reproved 20, 47, 340. of the Soul needful 206, 207.Cattle, the Hand of God upon them 5.Charity to the Poor 188, 205. rewarded 209.Childless Christians comforted 112.Children, Christ's Regard to them 198. commended to God 51. destroyed 141. instructed 2. of God 281, 326.CHRIST, his Appearance after his Resurrection 245. second Appearance 314, 342. Ascension 244. his Blood, see Blood his Compassion 185, 205, 214, 235. Complaint on the Cross 192, 193. Christians compleat in him 299. his Conquests 41, 356, 357. the Door 228. our Forerunner

311. forsaken by his Disciples 191. by his Father 192, 193. his Flock comforted 208. humbled and exalted 139, 350. his Intercession 8. his Invitations 74, 224, 225, 360. living to him 276. the Lord our Righteousness 132. loving him 239, 246. his Message 203. his Nativity 200, 201. Prayer for his Enemies 217. precious to Believers 335. his Presence with his Churches 195, 352. a Prince and Saviour 248. rejoiced in tho' unseen 330. his Resurrection 194, 218. Christians risen and exalted with him 287. Root of David 359. Sanctification by him 242, 266. Security in him 336. his Sheep 230, 231, 232. Morning-Star 359. Steward of God's Family 85. Stone living and corner 333, 334. his Submission 190. Sun of Righteousness 173. his Transfiguration 183. his Triumph 41. unchangeable 323. Union with him 267. our Wisdom, Righteousness, &c. 266.Christians, see Saints.Church, Birth-place of the Saints 49. Glory in the latter Day 118. Christ's Presence with it 195. Care of it 352. its Prosperity, a Minister's Happiness 301. purified and guarded 107. its Security 182. praying for a Pastor 13, 370.Comfort in God 20. to the childless 112. under Death of Friends 236, 260, 302. See Support.Communion with God thro' Christ 346, 347.Compassion of God 55, 109. of Christ 185, 205, 214, 219, 235. christian 205, 282.Conduct of Christ, mysterious 234.Consolation from God 277. from Christ 235.
Covenant, the Blood of it delivering Prisoners 169. Engagements of it desired 137. rejoiced in 23. supporting under Troubles 21. in Death 22. unchangeable 355.Courage in Religion 9. in the Cause of Christ 247.Course, the Christian's finished with Joy 255.Creatures, insufficient 125. mean 97. vain 268.Cross of Christ, its Influence 233, 276, 280.Cup of Blessings 106.CYRUS' Spirit stirred up 24.DDAemoniack, relapsing 180. recovered 204.DAVID encouraging himself in God 20. his vain Persuit of Perfection on Earth 63. his last Words 365.Day of small Things not despised 168. of Grace 127, 256. of Judgment, see Judgment.Dead quickened 89. pious, living to God 215.Death appointed to all 313. conquered by Christ 308. under his Controul 351. of Friends improved 164. Happiness beyond it 295. a great Journey 27. none in Heaven 358. prepared for 130, 313. rejoiced in 361. a Sleep 196. Support in it 22, 32, 45. uncertain Time of it 130, 134, 329.Delaying Sinners admonished 127, 130, 256, 292, 309, 329.Deliverance celebrated 58, 59, 60, 364. publick 272, 369. spiritual 105, 204.Desires known to God 39. See Prayer.Devil, see Satan.
Devotion, daily 79. secret 177. an Evidence of Adoption 281. See Prayer.Diligence, christian 199, 210, 296.EEDucation, good 2. bad 141.Enemies of God destroyed 44. of Christ destroyed 213. his Prayer for them 217. of the Church, restrained 46. Defence against them 95. Love to them 217. spiritual, see Satan.ENOCH'S Piety and Translation 1.Establishment in Religion 341.Eternity of God 54. of Christ 323. of heavenly Happiness 187, 302. employed in God's Praise 71.Evening Hymn 363.Examples, good, useful 175.FFAith and Confession 262. Jonah's recommended 157. living by it 280. in God's Name 30. struggling with Unbelief 197. the Syrophenician Woman's 181.Faithfulness of God 269, 316, 355.Fall of Adam, Effects of it 270.Family Religion 2. God's, under Christ's Care 85.Farewel, the christian 279.Fast-Days, Hymns for 3, 6, 83, 84, 116, 120, 140, 155, 158, 186, 339, 368.Fasts, unsuccessful, accounted for 116.Fathers, State of them reflected on 164.Fear, unreasonable, restrained 15, 30, 47, 98.
Feast of Wisdom 76. of the Gospel 211. the Christian's secret Feast 222.Fire, God's Controversy by it 154. his Word compared to it 133. everlasting, the Portion of the Wicked 189.Forgiveness of Enemies 217. divine, see Pardon.Forsaking God, its Evil 131. the Misery of being forsaken by him 18.Foundation, the divine, firm 305. of the Church, Christ 333, 334.Frailty of Man, and God's Pity 55.Fruitfulness of Christians 237, 240.Funeral Hymns 17, 25, 27, 32, 42, 196, 208, 215, 260, 295, 302. See Death, Grave, Resurrection.GGEnerations, succeeding, supported by God 51, passing away 164.Gentiles, Christ the Light of them 202. united to the Church 113, 284.Glory, divine, Moses' View of it 11. future, see Heaven.Glorying in God alone 128.GOD, his Blessing desireable 53. his Compassion 55, 109, 153. his Complacency in his People 38. in their Prosperity 37. in his Thoughts of Peace 135. in the Salvation of his Church 163. the Dwelling-Place of his People 51. his Eternity 54. his Faithfulness 269, 316, 355. the God of the Patriarchs 319. his Goodness to Saints 34. to all Creatures 56. crowning the Year 43. ever-enduring 67. relished 35. his Greatness 97. the Happiness of his People 45.
his Justice and Mercy 12. his Knowledge of our Days 38. of our Distress 39. of our Frame 55. his Love in Christ 220. his pardoning Mercy 28, 50, 103, 160. his Name proclaimed 12. Trust in it 30. his People his Portion 14. our Portion here and hereafter 45. his Presence desireable 10. with his Saints 38. our Preserver 102. our Protector 31, 340. his Providence 47. its Bounties 176, 297. the Salvation of his People 36, 125. our Shepherd 144. shining into the Heart 274. speaking Peace 48, 109, 114. Support in him 15, 45. unchangeable 54. unknown 253. waiting to be gracious 93.Goodness of God for Time and Eternity 34. crowning the Year 43. everlasting 67. tasted 35. universal 56.Gospel, its happy Effects 86, 100, 111. its Feast 211. a Law of Liberty 327. its Progress desired 120, 121. its grand Scheme 284. its joyful Sound 50. its Treasure in earthen Vessels 275.Government of God, Zion's Joy 108. of Christ 85, 351. over Death and the unseen World 351.Grace, growing in it 344. pardoning 103, 160. perfecting 325. quickening 62. saved by it 286.Gratitude, the Spring of Religion 152. See Praise.Grave, its Solitude 25, 27. Christ's Triumph over it 194, 350, 351. See Resurrection.Grief at beholding Transgressors 64. moderated 196, 268, 302.HHAppiness of God's Israel 16. his Complacency in it 37, 38, 163. only in God 45.Hardening ourselves against God, fatal 26, 256, 309.Head of the Church, Christ 290. of Angels and Men 299.Health restored 58, 59, 60. spiritual 204, 223.Heaven, its Happiness 295. an Inheritance 285. everlasting Light there 119. made meet for it 298. its Rest 310. Seeing Christ there 295. to be sought first 178. View of it overcoming Grief and Death 358.Heavenly-mindedness 300.Help from God 19, 98, 257. sought and obtained 68.House of God above 33, 354. of Prayer 113. of Wisdom 76.Humiliation, and Exaltation of Israel 99. of Christ 139, 351. Day of, see Fast.Humility of a Penitent 142. under God's Hand 338, 339.Hymn for Morning 362. for Evening 363. for a Day of Prayer 120. See Praise.Hypocrisy, dreaded 250.IJACOB'S Vow 4.JERUSALEM, Christ's Tears over it 214. his Gospel first preached there 219. the new 354.Incarnation of Christ 200, 220.Inconstancy in Religion 151.
Inheritance of the Upright 38. of Heaven 285.Iniquity abounding 186. to be avoided 7.Intercession of Christ 8.Invisible God, regarded 321.Joy, religious 69. in God 161. in Christ 330, 335.ISRAEL and Amalek 6. backsliding invited to return 122. its Happiness 16. humbled and exalted 99. its Obstinacy 88. its Stupidity 83.Jubilee, the Gospel 50.Judgment appointed to all 313. approaching 317. Circumstances of it 342. no escaping it 337. prepared for 343. desired and rejoiced in 314, 361. happy for the Saints 303.Judgments and Mercies of God compared 109.Justice and Mercy of God 12.KKEY of David in Christ's Hand 85, 350, 351.Kingdom of God to be first sought 178. of Christ 41, 351. of Heaven 187, 208.Knowledge of God sought 150. experimental 345.LLAW of Liberty 327.Liberality, see Charity.Liberty given by Christ 226, 227. the Law of 327. to enter the Holiest 315.Life, abundant by Christ 229, 349. the Christian's connected with Christ's 236. the Fountain of it 170. vain 52. uncertain 130, 134, 329.Light shining into the Heart 274. of the Gentiles,Christ 202. everlasting from God 119. of good Examples 175.Living to Christ 276, 294. by Faith in him 280. to God hereafter 215.Love of God in sending his Son 220. in giving all Things with him 261. shed abroad 259. of Christ, in ministring to Men 184. in giving himself for them 184, 291, 293. to Christ expressed 335. continued in 239. Appeal to him for its Sincerity 246. to Men 291. unfeigned 331. to Enemies 217.MMAjesty of God 97.Man, frail and mortal 270. frail, but God eternal 54.Marriage, spiritual 293.Meditation and Retirement 29.Meek, their Happiness 72.Mercy, pardoning 103, 160. despised 258. See Compassion.Military Ode 366.Ministers, under Christ's Care 352. Christ ever with them 195. comforted, that they may comfort others 271. Comfort on their Death 17, 182, 195, 275. faithful, promoted to join the Angels 166. frail and weak 275. given by God 123. the Church's Prosperity their Happiness 301. sweet Savour to God 273. sought from God 13, 370. watching for Souls 324. willing to be employed 82. die, but the Gospel lives 275.Ministry instituted 289. Christ's unsuccessful 104.Miracles for Israel in the Wilderness 47.Moderation, christian 268.
Morning Hymn 362.Mortality, see Man, Death.MOSES, his wise Choice 320 his Regard to the invisible God 321. his Song 357. his View of the divine Glory 11.Mourners comforted 66, 196, 302. See Comfort, Support.Multitude not to be followed to Evil 7.NNAtional Sins lamented 140. Deliverances celebrated 272, 369.Nature frail, but God compassionate 55. and Scripture 63.Nearness to God thro' Christ 113, 288.New-Year's Day, Hymns for 19, 43, 52, 67, 134, 257.NOAH preserved in the Ark 336.November the 5th, Hymns for 108, 272, 369.OOBedience to the heavenly Vision 82. to God's Word 136. the Design of national Deliverances 369.Ordination, Hymns for 82, 123, 166, 275, 289, 324.PPArdon of Sin celebrated 103, 153, 160. for the chief of Sinners 219. and Strength 160.Part, the better chosen 207, 320.Patience under Afflictions 42. under mysterious Providences 212. in waiting 93, 295.Patriarchs, a City prepared for them 319.
Peace, with God sought 91. obtained 87, 114. rejoiced in 135. improved 48. in Christ amidst Tribulations 241. publick celebrated 367.Perfection, not to be found in Nature 63. in Religion 341.Persecution to be expected by Christians 306.Perseverance of the Saints 232, 341.Pity, see Compassion.Poor, trusting in God 162. Charity to them 188, 205, 209.Portion of God, his People 14. God, ours 45.Power of God 26, 156. the Security of the Saints 31. 216, 232.Praise to God, everlasting 71. for Christ 201, 220. for his Goodness 34, 35, 43, 56. his everlasting Goodness 67, 70. for the Hope of Glory 298. for Liberty of Worship 49. for Ministers 123, 289. for Pardon 160. for publick Peace 367, 369. for Preservation 257. for Protection 31. for Recovery from Sickness 58, 59, 60, 364. as our Shepherd 144. for spiritual Blessings 283. for temporal Blessings given with Christ 261.Prayer heard 68. secret 177. Family 2. for the Spirit 251. for Ministers 13, 370. for the Revival of Religion 120, 121. House of Prayer 113.Preparation to meet God 156. for Christ's second Coming 317, 343.Presence of God desireable 10. of Christ with his Churches 17, 195.Preservation, from God 31, 95, 102, 257.Pride punished 26.Prisoners, spiritual delivered 105, 169, 203.
Privileges misimproved 127. of Christians by the Blood of Christ 287, 288, 347, 348, 356.Promises, God's Fidelity to them 316, 355.Prosperity from God 53. not to be expected by Rebels against him 26. dreadful, if abused 212.Providence 108. followed 318. its Bounties 176, 297. its Mysteries to be cleared up hereafter 212, 234.QQUickning Grace desired 62.Quietness under Trouble 42.RRAce, the Christian 296. Christ our Forerunner in it 311.Raiment, spiritual 132, 165.Rainbow around the Throne 355.Rebels against God warned 44. punished 26, 156. against Christ executed 213.Rebellion, impudent 136. Hymn for Deliverance from it 46.Recovery from Sickness 58, 59, 60, 364.Redemption by Christ 170, 226, 227, 266.Rejoicing in God amidst Poverty 161. in Christ tho' unseen 330. in our Covenant-Engagements 23. in the Views of Death and Judgment 314, 361. See Joy.Religion revived 146. Activity in it 172. Inconstancy in it 151. Gratitude the Spring of it 152.Repentance commanded to all 254. the Means of Pardon 28. producing Humility and Submission 142.Resignation, see Patience, Submission.
Rest, the holy Soul's in God 57. remaining for God's People 310.Resurrection of Christ 194, 218. of Christians 89, 260, 270, 287. by the Spirit 260.Retirement, and Self-Examination 29.Returning to God 122, 126, 149.Revival of Religion attempted 172. prayed for 120, 121.Riches, their Vanity 63, 212. Desire of them moderated 268. everlasting, obtained by Charity 209.Righteous Men, see Saints.Righteousness from Christ 132, 165, 266, 274.Rod of God heard 159. its good Effects 143.SSAbbath, the eternal 310.Sacrifice of Christ 220, 291. See Blood. the living 263.Safety in God 31, 90, 95, 98, 102. in the Ways of Religion 96Saints, their Excellency 77, 78. their Happiness 16, 38. God's Portion 14. their Prospects for Time and Eternity 33, 45. their Sentence and final Happiness 187. Christ glorified in them 303. and Sinners different Views in Time of Danger 94. different End 212.Salvation approaching 264. beautifying the Meek 72. everlasting 310, 314. See Heaven. from God 36. God magnified for it 40. speaking it to his People 36. by Grace 286. the Scheme of it worthy of God 307. the Word of it sent to us 252.
Samaritan, the good 205.Sanctification of Christ and his Church 242. by Christ 266, 293.Satan, his Captives lamented 129. conquered by Christ 308. by Christians 356. his Head bruised 265. his Power restrained 216. his strong Holds cast down 278.Scripture, its Excellency 63. See Word.Seasons of the Year 43.Secret Prayer 177.Seeking the Knowledge of God 150. the Kingdom of God first 178. Things above 300. Christ 75.Self-Dedication 23, 263.Self-Examination 29, 138.Sepulchre in the Garden 243. See Grave.Serving Christ 276, 294. with Zeal 210, 247.Settlement of a Minister, a Hymn for 123. See Ordination, Minister.Sheep, Christ's, their Character 230. Happiness 231. Security 232. comforted 208. God's Care of them 144. recovered from Wandering 65.Shepherd of Saints is God 144.Sickness, healed 58, 59, 60, 364. spiritual, healed 204, 223.Silence under Affliction 42. See Submission.SIMEON'S Song and Prophecy 202.Sin, its Captives lamented 129. causing Grief to good Men 64. cleansed by Christ's Blood 312. 348. pardoned 160, 179. remorstrated against 115. none in Heaven 310.Singing in God's Ways 69. See Joy, Rejoicing.Sinners alarmed 80. destroyed 26. their Doom 148. exhorted 328. recovered 204. relapsing 180. theirfinal Sentence and Misery 189. warned of their Appearance at Judgment 337. their vain Refuge 337.Soldier, the christian, animated and crowned 353, 354.Song of Moses and the Lamb 357. See Hymn, Praise.Soul, God its Saviour 36. its Strength 68. the Care of it needful 206, 207.Spirit of God, compared to Water 221, 225, 360. his Influences desired 145, 251, 360. lifting up his Standard 117. the Proof of our Adoption 281. quickening dead Saints 260. revealing Heaven 285.Spirits of Men under God's Influence 24. departing committed to Christ 249.Spiritual Enemies, see Satan.State of the Dead reflected on 164.Stone, the living 333. the corner 334.Strength from Heaven 15, 68, 98, 269.Subjection to God 322.Submission to God 42, 190.Success of the Gospel 100, 111, 147, 173. sought 120, 121.Sufferings of Christ 191, 307. and his Successes 41, 139. of Christians 306. See Grief, Comfort, Support.Sun of Righteousness 173.Supper, Lord's, Hymns for it 171, 288, 350.Support from God 15. in Death 32, 45. in the Covenant under Troubles 20, 21. in Death 22. on the Death of faithful Ministers 17, 182, 195,
pious Friends 17, 196, 208, 215, 260, 302. young Christians 234.Sympathy, christian 205, 282,TTAble of the Lord polluted 171. spread, and Invitations sent 211.Tasting divine Goodness 35. that the Lord is gracious 332.Teachings, divine 110. Christ's excellent 175.Temple, the spiritual 167, 333. the heavenly and Christians Pillars in it 33, 354.Temptations moderated 216. overcome 356. Strength proportioned to them 269.Thankfulness, see Praise.Thanksgiving, Hymns of 67, 70, 71. for publick Mercies 46, 95, 272, 369.Things small, the Day of, not despised 168.Time, redeemed 130, 292, 317, 329. wasted 52, 127.Triumph in God's Protection 31. of Christ 41. of the Gospel, see Success.Trouble, Patience under it 42. Consolation in it 235. in domestick Troubles 21. See Support.Trust in God 30, 87, 162.V UVAcant Congregations seeking God 13, 370.Vanity of Creatures, and God's Sufficiency 125. of earthly Things 268. of Man 63. of Man and Majesty of God 97. of Riches 212. of worldly Schemes 329. of our Years 52.Victory celebrated 46, 272, 369. spiritual, see Satan.
Vine, Christ the true 237. abiding in him 237, 238.Vineyard of God 81. its Unfruitfulness punished 174.Unbelief and Faith struggling 197.Unchangeableness of God 54. of Christ 323. of the Covenant 355.Unknown God 253.Voice of Christ calling Men 74. of God to be immediately heard 309. of the Rod heard 159.Vows, religious encouraged 137. rejoiced in 23.WWAiting for God 93.Walking with God 1, 79.Warfare, spiritual 199, 306, 353, 354. See Satan.Watchfulness, christian 199, 210.Waters, living, an Emblem of the Spirit 221, 225, 360. of the Sanctuary 147.Ways of God, singing in them 69. Safety in them 96. the blind and weak led in them 101. of the Upright known to God 38. searching and trying our Ways 138.Wicked, see Sinner.Wilderness, transformed 100. Miracles in it 47.Wisdom, her House and Feast 76. her Invitations 76. her Reproofs and Encouragements 73. true 150. Christ our Wisdom 266.Word of God, its Benefit to Youth 61. its Efficacy 133, 356. its Excellency 63.World, transitory 268. vain 329. destroyed 342.
Worship, daily 79. Family 2. secret 177. opening a new Place of Worship 49.Wrath, future 189. treasured up 258. of Enemies restrained 95. and overruled 46.YYEar, crowned with divine Goodness 43. wasted 52. See New-Year's Day.Youth pressed to regard Scripture 61. to seek Christ 75. to seek Heaven first 178. Comfort on their Death 234.ZZEal for God 9. for Christ's Cause 246, 247, approved and rewarded 172.ZION, God comforting it 163. intreated for it 120. its Joy in God's Government 108. purified and guarded 107. the high-Way to it 96. Way to it sought 137. See Church.FINIS.BOOKS published by the late Reverend P. DODDRIDGE, D. D.And sold by J. WAUGH and W. FENNER, at the Turk's Head in Lombard-street, LONDON.I. THE FAMILY-EXPOSITOR. In Three Volumes, 4to. Vol. I. & II. containing a Paraphrase and Version of the Four Evangelists, disposed in Order of an Harmony, with critical Notes, and a practical Improvement of each Section. Vol. III. contains the Acts of the Apostles, with two Dissertations: 1. On Sir Isaac Newton's System of the Harmony. 2. On the Inspiration of the New Testament, with proper Indexes to the whole. Price bound 1l. 18s. Vol. III. may be had separate.II. The Rise and Progress of RELIGION in the Soul: Illustrated in a Course of serious and practical Addresses, suited to Persons of every Character and Circumstance; with a devout Meditation to each Chapter. 8vo. 5s. 12mo. 3s.III. Ten Sermons on the Power and Grace of CHRIST, and on the Evidences of his glorious Gospel. 8vo. 4s. 12mo. 2s. 6d. The 3 Sermons on the Evidences, &c. may be had separate.IV. Ten Practical Discourses on Regeneration. 2s. 6d. bound.V. Sermons on the Religious Education of Children. 3d Edit. 1s. bound.VI. Sermons to Young Persons on several Subjects. 3d Edit. 1s. 6d. bound.Now publishing by Subscription, in Three Volumes,THE FAMILY-EXPOSITOR on the Epistolary Part of the NEW TESTAMENT, with the Book of the Revelation, consisting of a large Paraphrase on the whole; in which a new Translation of the Sacred Text will be inserted in a distinct Character: To which will be added, Critical Notes, with a practical Improvement of each Section. The First Volume (containing the Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians) is already delivered to the Subscribers. The other two Volumes are in the Press in great Forwardness. The Price to Subscribers is 1 l. 16 s. sewed in blue Paper.Subscriptions are taken in by Mrs. Doddridge at Northampton, and J. Waugh and W. Fenner, at the Turk's Head in Lombard-Street, London: Of whom may be had all the Author's other Works.N. B. The Subscribers to those Volumes may be assured the Publication of these Hymns hath not retarded that Work; which will be published with as much Expedition, as the Nature of such a Work, and the other Engagements of those Gentlemen, who superintend the Press, will admit.Lately publishedThe Christian's Triumph over Death. A Sermon occasioned by the much-lamented Death of the Rev. Philip Doddridge, D. D. by Job Orton.BOOKS Printed by J. Cotton and J. Eddowes in SALOP; And Sold by T. and T. Longman in Pater-noster Row, LONDON.1. A CATECHISM, or Summary of Doctrinal and Practical Religion. Part 1. The Evidences and Doctrines of Christianity. 2. The Divine Virtues. 3. The Social Virtues. 4. The Human Virtues. 5. The general Properties and Perfection of Holiness. 6. Of Repentance. 7. Motives to Religion. 8. General Application to Youth. With a Preface, shewing the Importance and Advantage of a Religious Education; Recommended to the serious Perusal of all Heads of Families and Young Persons. 1 s.II. Reading made more easy. A Spelling-Book for Children, with Variety of Pictures for their Instruction and Delight. 4th Edit. Corrected and much enlarged. 4 d.III. A Call to the Unconverted. By the late Rev'd and pious Mr. Richard Baxter. To which are added, Directions how to spend every ordinary Day, and every Lord's-Day. Collected from the Works of Mr. Baxter and Dr. Doddridge. 1 s.IV. A Plain Catechism for Children: To which is added, Another for those who are to be admitted to the Lord's-Supper. 7th Edit. By Matthew Henry.V. A Compassionate Address to the Christian World. By. J. Reynolds.N. B. The three last are in the Welch Language.Of whom may be had,Select Portions of the Singing Psalms from the two Versions allowed by Authority. For the Use of Churches. 6 d. bound.