Capt. Dampier's Vindication of his Voyage To the South-Seas in the Ship St. George.With some small Obseations for the  on Mr Fel's Chimeical  Of the Voyage Roun the World; and Deted in Little. until he shall be Examin'd more at Large.IN the first place, he calls himself my Mate; He went out my Steward, and afterwards I did mae a Mihipman of him: Indeed he had the Advanage of perusing Draughts and Books, of which he afterwards  a slender Account, for some he preended were lost, and others the Draug are torn  of th; Especially the Draughts of Winds, which I grealy suspect him of Doing, because he is not the first Man that has Endeavour'd to build upon another Man's Foundation.2. In pag. 3. lin. 4. he says, that Cap. Pullen was going in Compny with us; but while we lay at Anchor in the Downs, there arose a Differece between to wo Captains, on which Pullen went away.I wonder at his Impudence for I was at London, when Cap. Pullen ent away; and  was the Owner's, His, and Mine could not agree▪ to whom I Appeal.3. In p. 2. 1. 27. Our Pposals, says he, were to go into the River of Plate, and to  Airs, to take 2 or 3 Spanish Galleons, whch Cap gives an Acont of (I say Capt. Dampier, as he does,  Gentleman that  not to return Home  there I desre to knw of th Gentleman, when it was tha gave this Accou, ad to : I must confess there was some Discourse about it; but I never desigo go to Buonas Aires, for em, being such a Dangerous River  Ʋp: And I think Capt. Pullen  something  from thence may conclude that be plea▪ For ▪He giv Reasons of his  we did not go to Buonas Aires.  produce Reasons!Where Mr. Funn says Cpt. Dampier and Liet. Huzford▪Tere  Mr. Morgn, Purser and Agent that disagreed with  Huzford▪ went ashore▪ and Fought; upon  Corriidor, Cofu' Mr. Hxford, nd a , he himself sent fr  Cht and Cloaths, which  I ay bfore  I ent for him Aboard, and  actually came,  I had no  of  but Mr. Morgan swore if Mr Huxford, sau'd  not go the Voyage. And where ill Blood upon which I ordered hm to go on Boad Capt., whose Boat was on  along our ide, an after a Genleman -manner) , but it happen'd  carrying  to th, He andxford disagreeing  thy were goig fro, he  him on Boad a Portugueze Marhan-Man.4 In relation to Jmes Baby, second Liet He says, that  and eight of the Men went on shore and left us, taking their Chests and Cloaths with them,To the : I take God to witness I never  but I rfus'd them;  nothing like the former Design; This Mr. Morgan can .In p. 3 Mr▪ Fanel, to settle my Mistakes says he saw . But every body know it is a Greater .The' thre may be more  that we pass over to abrevite this Matter, as yet, my Crew not being wholly ere, I mion o, the two Action of the Voyage, .The first of which is the Engag'd, that was crsing to the Island ofan Fernando's, to hom we gave Chace from 3 in the Afternoon, and , making of her  I found she was an Eopean Ship and not a Spaniard not willing to pursue  farther, but the  Right or Wrong  follow'd her, and next , we came up  her; and when I saw nohing would  Attempt, I encourag'd them . By this time my Consort  given her a Broad side;  up  and gave her a Broad-side likewise.  were then , they Fir'd upon our  his  his Help Notwithstanding , and Exchang'd 3 or 4 Broadsides  suffer'd, 9 kill'd and  woundd, which  much, they atually run down off the Deck, and made nothing of it afterwards; So that when I could have boarded her and carried her the Mate, Cleppington by Name,  The Men ar all gone; and Belhah the Master, whose Offic it was  upon Deck,  also; th this .In p. 25, 26. Mr. Funnell says the Crew were Desirous to  this Ship  they made nothing of i while in  Power; What was to be done afterwards? And as to my telling (as he says) I could et at ay time 500000 l. I say, so I,  my Boats which were then  my Pople have been Rul'd. In p. 32. Mr. Funnell says we took a Ship of 200 Tuns, loaden  several good Commodities, as Indigo, Cochineel, &c.Now for Cochineel, I never heard of any, Indigo there was;  the other, and the Turtleshl, he so frequently speaks of,  be go the same wy th many Rich and Valuable Goods

have, by the Management of those Pyrating Fellows, rather  Sailors, the Indigo I could not take on Board; nor could I trust any of them with the Sailing such a Ship, as could neither keep me Company, nor mak a right Steerage-way.In p. 33. He says truth as to Mr. Observator's Ship and the Monkey that was left in her; but as to Firing at any thing but the Ship, and the whole Crew, who before we could make up to her, had made into their Boats, and nothing beside the Cargo and the Monkey were indeed on Board, which  along, had we not Observators enough at Home.The next thing they Charge me with, especilly Mr▪ Fnnll in p. 41. in the  of St Michael, were in the Barque last taken, and Indian Cnoe  and that I order'd her to be Fir'd upon. The , for when I saw some of them that had Fr'd without my Orders, I wa very Ʋneasy and Troubled at it, knowing the Consequence of it.Te Second Thing that's Material is▪ that the Ship mentioned by Mr. Funnel in p. 45. 46. where he seems to  Dollars was Hid in the Run of the Ship, and I slipt the  of taking it, and  her Adrift; So this I answer, That I had evident Proof had Landed her Money at Truxille; and as to Provisions, we took as much as would provide us for One Year, and much longer, if well manag'd, that was, what our Ship could well , and this was the Steward and the Crew's Calculation. Now as to a Report that they make about Town  Dollars that  Ransom; First I had no convenient Road to Ride in and the strong Southerly Winds were set in, and so if I had Loyter'd for her, must certainly been Imbay'd for 3 or 4 Months: Besides the Winds, thro' the Treachery of the Spaniards, I have had the Experience of it before in a like Case, Riding  for Ransom with Capt. Swa and Capt. , for instead of keeping their Faith, they  off with a  the Night and 14 Peagoes; and  better Crew and  Men. We came narrowly ofNow, th they are Judges in my Case and Conduct, a  who were perpetually drunk, and very tit, you'll say,  the Night, or being kept in any Decorum. p. 46. 47. Whereas Mr. Funnell frequently wuld Insinuate, that I could agree with no body; and so says that parted this way with Capt. Stradling. I say, I Stradling; nay not only that, but at Juan de Fernandos, whe all hi Men left him, I reconcil'd them and him again; therefor ..The next Morning who is a very Valiat Man , with  Men and ire-Arms with them. What's observable is, it's not enough to Run away with  do what you please with  of Sik,  or any other  and that I rfer my self to all Sailors in the World, wher it was right or not. A csidering the Inequality of our  of Ship.fore  Action▪ we were to the Wind of he stndng , and we Bearing  her ith  oder'd my Officers to  to  to  of her; instead of this,  of my Heart, they Edg'd away, and were so far from ving the Power to Command and Board her, as I intended,  we lost the Opportunity, and were forc'd to Leward the  time; aft that I ck'd, cam abo, and had her under my Lee- the I hop'd to ▪ with my Chace Guns, she havg no -Chace to ; this I took to be the best way of Disabli he,  this  made her yield.  o this,  shew orld now  my Office were Master and the Mate theo the Great  the piate Men  her▪ For  an  a Man  Man at Hlm  oce moe:  While thing,  at , I ask'd  to Bod her. Clap he then, sid I. his time the being  and  to our , ▪ Now  I have gotten along , they were  her, that the Mast we about  of the ▪.para..FINIS.POSTSCRIPT.Having Read Capt. Le Wright's Proposals for another Expedition into  Seas, I do think it Poper and Advantagious, and that he was  Right; and I am ready to Satisfy any  of  cable and Expedient i is to put it in Execution frthwith.London. Printed by J. , at the Bibl in -Lane.