VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A COMI-TRAGEDY.PASSAGES SELECTED BY DISTINGUISHED PERSONAGES, ON THE GREAT LITERARY TRIAL OF VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A Comi-Tragedy."WHETHER IT BE—OR BE NOT FROM THE IMMORTAL PEN OF SHAKSPEARE?"VOLUME IV.—"Open me a huge Wardrobe aboundinge in motlie habittes, and marke howe fantasticallie poore mortals will arraie themselves!" VORT. and ROW.LONDON: PRINTED BY H. BROWN, FOR J. RIDGWAY, PICCADILLY, FACING BOND-STREET.IRELAND versus SHAKSPEARE!!!By the COURT.IT having been specially moved by our Clerk in Court, on behalf of the Editor of the MORNING HERALD, for leave to file further evidence in the above Cause, we have conceded to said Motion, and have thereon directed, that judgment in said Cause should be staid and suspended, until it be ruled to the contrary.(Signed) POLONIUSDie Mercurii,oJulii, 1807.CONTENTS.A
Ad—ngt—n, Mr. H. 5Ab—n, late March. of 16Ab—n, Marquis of 21, 81Ant—m, Countess of 24Alb-n's, St. Duch. of 42, 80Ad—m, Miss 66Ang—st—n, Mr. 91Anst—r, Sir John 112B
B—th, Countess of 8, 88B—nf—d, Mrs. Paul 2B—rkl—y, Earl of 85B—rg—s, Sir Bland 51B—rd—tt, Lady 8B—nb—y, Sir Ch—s 79B—ckf—d, Miss 98B—k—m, March. of 99B—sv—Ile, Mr. 108B—rn—y, Mrs. 104B—df—d, Duke of 105Bl—ke, Lady 108Br—nd, Mr. 118C
C—rtn—y, Mr. 27Cr—ft—n, Hon. Miss 28C—nw—Ilis, Marquis 32C—mbe, H—v-y, Alder. 43C—v—d—sh, Lady Geo. 46Cr—v—n, Lord 49C—rl—sle, Earl of 53C—b—e, Mr. 55C—v—nt—y, Earl of 61Cant—b—y, Archb—p of 73C—d, Earl 85C-v-nd-sh, Lady Harriet 86C—yng—m, Countess of 110C—v—t—y, Miss Georgina [now Mrs. B—nes] 113D
D—v—ns—re, Duke of 7D—rs, B-tl-r, Hon. Mrs. 12D—gl—s, Marquis of 29D—cre, Dowager Lady 44D—rs—t, Duchess of 54D—rsl—y, Lord 83
D-di-y and W-rd, Lady 84D—r, Hon. Mrs. 119E
Eam—r, Sir John 45Ell—nb,—gh, Lord 57E—k—ne, Lord Chan. 106F
F—x, Hon. Miss 26, 50F—ley, Lord 47G
G—ldf—d, Geo. E. of 9, 59Gr—y, Sir Charles, K. B. 11G—ll—w—y, Earl of 15G—rd—n, Lady Georg. 62Glenb—vie, Lord 67Gr—nv—lle, Lord 115H
Harew—d, Lady 6H-m-lt-n, Lady Cath. 20, 72H—pe, Mrs. 22H—rr—s, Colonel 23H—od, Viscountess 52H—th—m, Sir Beaumont 88H—ntl—y, Marquis of 97H-m-lt-n, Lady 116K
Kn-wles, General, [commonly called Earl of B-nb-ry] 117L
L—d—n, Lady 18L—y—n, Mrs. 34L—c—n, Lady 36L—ng, Lady Catherine 58Ly—n, Mrs. 89M
M—z—ne, Lady 10M—re, Mrs. 64M—lv—le, Lord Vis—t 87M—ra, Countess of 90N
N—c—lls, Mr. 39N—th, Mr. Dudley 69N—rf—k, Duke of 101N—ls—n, the Rev. Earl 114O
Or—ge, H. R. H. the P. of 13O—to, Mr. 41Oxf—d, Countess of 56P
P—g—t, Lord 37Pr—ce, Lady Caroline 60P—lt—y, Sir William 77P—yt—n, Sir Harry 93P—ph—m, Sir Home 95, 100P—nt—n, Mrs. 96P—rs, Sir John 111
R
Ryd—r, Hon. Mr. 3R—mn—y. Lord 25R—c—mier, Madame 30R—ch—d, Duke of 107S
S—v—lle, L-ml-y, Mrs. 40Sc—tt, Sir William 63St—wart, Lady Caroline 68Sh—d—n, Mr. T. 71St—g, Sir James 74St—w—t, Lady Cath. 73S—ym—r, Miss (Piccadilly) 76S—ym—r, Miss M. G. E. 82S—m—rs—t, Duchess of 92S—tf—d, Marchioness of 96T
T—p—st, Sir H. V T. 17T—mple—wn, Lady 70T—yl—r, Hon. Mrs. Ed. 132T—nt—n, Mr. Rob—t 109V
V—ll—rs, Lord 33W
W—rc—st—r, Bishop of 1W—lkes, Miss 4W—sl—y, Lady Emily 31W—lk—r, Mrs. 48Whitw—th, Lord 65Y
Y—m—th, Countess of 14Y—ng, Rev. Arthur 19PASSAGES. SELECTED AS SUFFRAGES ON THE SEVENTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.CCC.—BISHOP OF W—RC—ST—R."On Severne's hallowed bankes, this mitred Seare,"In holie quietude is found, courtinge"No knowledge of mankinde, save that he drawes"Purelie from sacred, or from classique lore."Here he himself hath seal'd that peace above,"To which poore wayward mortals he invites"By the faire pattern of a well-spent lyfe."His castle frownes not on the front of man,"Nor hostile wing, nor battlement, displaies;"Firm, and secure in those goode workes alone,"Which virtue, by her consecrating spelle"Hathe drawn impenetrablie rounde him!"PAGE 11.—GENUINE.CCCI.—MRS. PAUL B—NF—D.—"'Twas Heaven's supreme decree,"That womankinde should be created faire"For the sweete gaze of manne's idolatrie!"So writes my travelle-making Sire; and though"A monie-hunting husbande thinks not thus,"I'll not be cast a lillie in the shade,"Palelie to wither, while my youth's in bloome!"PAGE 66.—GENUINE.CCCII.—HON. MR. RYD—R.Second to Mr. PITT.—"As sidesman, Sir, to his puissante honour on the gibbette-fringed heathe, I did endeavour, by much imparlance, to preserve it, Sans shotte, and blotte!—Soon as the motion was disposed of, I thought we might divide the fielde; but the Seconder o' th' other side proposed, that we should report progressive deedes, and pray for leave to meet again;—on this I moved the question previouslie arrang'd, and sine die, instantlie adjourned!"PAGE 37.—GENUINE.CCCIII.—MISS W—LKES."I threwe not off my politique disguise,"'Till o'er a father's vary-sighted eyes"The Cappe of Libertie was closelie drawn."Now may the worlde behold me as I am,"And counte those frailties with a fond delight,Which do besette a woman's pagan harte'Whose idol is of golde!"—PAGE 54.—Not GENUINE.SEVENTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCIV.—MR. H—Y AD—NGT—N.—"Since I am reputed Wit-cracker to the Prime Ruler o' the realm, he must right honourablie let me pouch a little o' the State-kernel, else shall I make the heardes of his Courtiers wagge, to the miserable tune of mine own improvidence!"PAGE 33.—GENUINE.CCCV.—LADY HAREW—D.—"I tell thee, Girle, I will gadde me on in my old woman's visitations, as I have been wont to do, sans interruption by authoritie supreme: they shall no more bind my feete than my tongue by their courtlie commandments!—Prithee, what are the enchaffings of the royal bloode to me, who can paie my visit of obeisance to them all, without stirring the coales of discontentment, to enfever either the one, or the other?"PAGE 66.—Not GENUINE.CCCVI.—DUKE OF D—V—NS—RE.—"If he hath heav'n's faire gifte of mortal speeche,"Why doth he dumblie ape the creatur'd race,"Who do an utterance to instincte give"Which he to reason churlishlie denies?"Possessing more of this worlde's garner'd stores"Than might suffice an hundred worthie men,"'Twould not detract from his puissante Grace"Were this calme Duke (since he'll not speak himselfe),"To call through gratitude their voices forthe,"And this way laude his bountifulle Creator!"PAGE 387.—GENUINE.CCCVII.—COUNTESS OF B—TH."What can that superfluxe of wealth availe,"Which the chill hand of mortal penurie"Hath plac'd so miserablie safe, that ev'n"One's own poore harte doth looke in vaine to sind it?"PAGE 17.—GENUINE.SEVENTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCVIII.—GEORGE EARL OF G—LDF—D."'Tis he alone pre-eminentlie peeres,"Who, by a minde unbroken, can sustaine"The bodie's pressure of unceasing illes!—"The very Destinies which hang around"ERESTERN's fraile and perishable frame,"Do seeme to mourne his dubitable state,"Where worthe, suspended in a wayward worlde,"Insurance of its faire deserts must seeke"O'er a bedarken'd voide, 'mid realmes unknowne!"PAGE 33.—GENUINE.CCCIX.—LADY M—Z—NE.—"I remember me a Prisonne-keeper's daughter at Aleppo, whom a haire-brained Counte did rescue front her iron bondage; and yet, forgetful of her own deliverance, she did afterwards employ her matron-houres in settinge silken springes, to catch you littel boyes, as they do larkes on a furzeblowne common!"PAGE 11.—Not GENUINE.CCCX.—SIR CHARLES GR—Y, K. B.—"He on the right flanke is a toughe remnant of true British daring!—I remember him presse Bellona's flameing carre against the sierie coursers of the sunne, under the varying signs of the zodiaque, and keepe a soldier's pace with them:—but now, having nought to wage against in foreign climes, he will occupie himself, forsoothe, in a kind of church-militancie, and predicate, because he cannot sighte!—On his chrest, which well adorns the frontlette of our isle, he dothe displaie a lustrous starre, to which the Militaire Magi o' the Easte do come, and most idolatrouslie worshippe!"PAGE 86.—GENUINE.CCCXL—HON. MRS. B—TL—R D—RS."What can a plenitude of wealthe availe"The sillie creature, destinied to beare"A loade of provender for others waste?"That rueful morne, when Birta's feverish palme"(Obedient to inordinate desire)"Did at the altarre sensuallie ope"In fruitless speculation—then was loste"The little remnant of that precious store"Which woman charilie should treasure up!"PAGE 104.—Not GENUINE.SEVENTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXII.—H. R. H. the PRINCE OF OR—GE."Certes, good-man Dominique, a Potentate dothe slumber you more soundlie in his own nighte-cappe, than under a crownette which he wears for other men's repose:—nay, and doth batten more kindlie on his dailie comforts, when he hathe bidden this worlde's state a good nighte!"PAGE 27.—GENUINE.CCCXIII.—COUNTESS OF Y—M—TH.—"Those merrilie begotten, they doe saie,"By Nature's righte may merrilie begette."Where's the proscription on those baselie born,"When any punie thing of lordlie race,"With salving superfluxe of his high birthe"Can take it off, by one weake, wanton noose,"Wrought upon wedlocke's simple bande?—Thus far"By chaunce thrust forward on the road to fame,"Who knows, but lyke my prototypeSupposed to glance at the dignified favourite of a SOVRAIN PRINCE, in a former reign. of yore,"I may to regalle splendoure soone ascend?"PAGE 44.—Not GENUINE.CCCXIV.—EARL OF G—LL—W—Y.—"He is right-noblie gifted i' the saving arte, knowing the weight of man, and beaste, onlie by the scale averdupoise—Why he will selle you a faire-skinned daughter, and a thick-hided Galloway runt, in one lotte at so much per stone; and barlie throw his blessinge, as the offall, into the bargaine!"PAGE 34.—GENUINE.CCCXV.—LATE MARCHIONESS OF AB—N."Meeklie as may befitte my subject sexe,"I fain would now be heard in that defence"Which frailtie hath to make. Indignant Lorde!"When first you turn'd a gracious eye on me,"I was the blest associate of your wyfe;"And whether in our unitie of minde,"By curse instinctivelie she did imparte"A portion of that love, her rightful due—"Or by what other meanes the deed were done,"You best can tell. If, by untimelie fate,"My harte to fruites forbidden did aspire,"And afterwards might fancie, 'twas bereft"Of joies, God's ordinance did sanction mine."How could the weaker vessell stand secure,"If no protecting hande were then out-stretch'd"To rescue it from violence?"PAGE 77.—Not GENUINE.SEVENTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXVI.—SIR H. V. T. T—P—ST.—"Come Ladde, now lead young Pharos forthe"Rich in Arabian bloode!—and quicklie his,"To give me trial of his winde, and speede!"I have a goodlie sum of ducquattes on the race,"With that darke, congregated bande of knaves,"Who by their sable rites do baselie staine"Old Englande's verdant turfe! Next take you heede,"That not a creature by two legges upborne"With wizzard face, his resting place approach,"Lest the right honeste powers of the brute"By man's device be bruteallie subdued,"And his harte sinke ere he can reach the goale!"PAGE 77.—GENUINE.CCCXVII.—LADY L—D—N.—"I thanke your Grace, for all your proffered love."But of the spreading honours of your house"I am not meete to be partak'resse!—"Your fretted roofe encircleth underneath"So much of mortal's high, and daintie bloode,"That 't would be arrogance in simple me"To place myself at such a fire side;"Therefore by your goode leave, I will awaite"'Till Comforte in her humbler caste, doth shew"A little corner of her owne, where I"May sette myselfe connubiallie downe!"PAGE 78.—Not GENUINE.CCCXVIII.—REV. ARTHUR Y—NG.—"Go to, slave! I have the lawe's deliverance, and therefore defie the malice of those freeborne varlettes, who did threaten me with durance vile for my letter most pastorallie indited i' the State's defence.—Beshrewe me, if I had become enamour's of Aegyptian task-masters, and peradventure thought mankinde were primitivelie ordain'd for bondage, what were that to any man living, gentle or simple, mine own reverence alone excepted? Talke not to me, of penalties of the Lawe, who am ordained to promulgate condemnations by the cannons of the Gospelle!—Why, Sirrah! he that had the felicitie of my begetting, is he not chiefe enregister of a congregated body of mightie menne, who do fortunatelie possesse more of this worlde's landes, than they have wittes to tille?—Moreover, hathe he not ta'en the shallow-soiled understandings of some of those to farme, and thus enabled them to let ther sapience lie in fallowe?—If he then, being so great a Scribe, could not worke out an onlie sonne's deliverance, though he were a Pharisee, he would be passing strange indeed!"—PAGE 44.—GENUINE.CCCXIX.—LADY CATHERINE H—M—LT—N.—"Watch o'er the lovelie flowrette of yon vale,"That ere its fibrous system could be form'd"Loste the maternal stemme from whence it sprang!"So charilie she puts her virginne beauties forthe,"That they doe modestlie rebuke the wanton gaze"Of those, who seeke sweete innocencie out"To cherish not, but baselie to despoile it!"PAGE 236.—GENUINE.SEVENTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXX.—MARQUIS OF AB—N."When I doe traffique next in this worlde's fleshe,"I'll choose me out, to deck dull Hymen's terme,"A female offering not quite so faire."I've notic'd, Sir, beneath the purest veile,"That where the woman's skinne be over-fine,"At an ungenial quarter of the moone,"Some cursed gad-flie strikes her to the quicke,"And goades the maddening current of her bloode"To deedes of desperation!—Oh 'tis then"They tosse men up like animals in aire,"For girles, and bachellors to laugh at!"PAGE 88.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXI.—MRS. H—PE.—"What a marvellous revolution chucke! How condescending in the High, and Mighty Duchesse, to make great folkes, out of us such little bodies!—When I did thank her for the honour she hathe conferred upon us, she bade me be of goode cheere, and graciouslie whispered in mine eare, that she would supplie us with all courtlinesse, and good breedinge, if we would only find ducquattes, and lowlie demeanour?—Heaven blesse her Grace's condescension!"PAGE 43.—GENUINE.CCCXXII.—COL. H—RR—ES.—"That's one, who hath been more annoyed by the privie shaftes of misfortune, than the javelins of an armed hoste—yet hath he made proud heade against them, because his breaste was firmlie mailed round with honour!—I tell thee, VORTIGERN, the soldier will march more erectlie in this buffetting worlde, who hath first walked through it, as an upright manne!"PAGE 101.—GENUINE.CCCXXIII.—COUNTESS OF ANT—M."So!—I have mourn'd in pennancie so longe"For a departed Lorde, that I did feare"His clay-cold ghoste, and therefore have betooke"My frighted fancie to a living hope!"And this was chronicled of maiden me!—"Well, girle, I care not what these gossips prate,"Or how in wedlocke they doe bind me up,"So they bestowe my little harte but leave"To seale its own true fealtie in love!"PAGE 29.—GENUINE.EIGHTIETH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXXIV.—LORD R—MN—Y."He mette his Sov'rain i' the tented fielde"Not cloth'd in wrathe, as Barons moved of yore"To wreste from tyrannie a subject's rightes;"But, with a people's fealtie array'd,"To nerve their Prince against a rutheful foe!"Oh! 'twas a greeteing worthie of the lande,"On which the Goddes did looke approveing down,"Makeing, with Brittishe Chiefes, a common cause!"PAGE 45.—GENUINE.CCCXXV.—HON. MISS F—X."With Doctors sagelie rob'd, she dothe dispute,"And eloquentlie leade them all a daunce"Through their own mystique schooles, untill they shake"Their reverent eares, and marvelling, conclude"Her sapience praeternatural! In truthe,"She will assaile you nothing but men's heades,"Leaveing their sillie hartes to be subdued"By babie-minded misses just in teenes!"PAGE 18.—GENUINE.CCCXXVI.—MR. C—RTN—Y.—"This, Sirs, is one of those unprofitable wights that will breake you jeste upon jeste, 'till they do forgette the humbler meanes of breakeing their own faste! Yet is he a singular cracker of drie jokes, and plaies right humorouslie with the shelles, until he hathe lost the kernelles!—Had he been of the Squirrel race, they would have banished him their woodland crafte, sor so improvident an use of his sharp-edged instruments!"PAGE 76.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXVII.—HON. HISS CR—FT—N."Why am I greeted lovelie, talle, and faire,"To heare each rival sister grac'd the same?"A purer tribute does that flow'rette knowe,"Which singlie rises from a lowlie stemme!"Less homage of men's eyes would me suffice,"Were it all integrallie mine; but blisse,"In fickle guise of subdivided love,"Comes, like the prism's manie-coloured ray,"To chill by fleeting o'er the maiden harte,"And vanishes afar!"—PAGE 99.—Not GENUINE.EIGHTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.CCCXXVIII.—MARQUIS OF D—GL—S.—"Why, my merrie masters, do you enquire of me the pedigree of that stocke, your rantipolle womenne of qualitie throwe out at so tickellish a seasone? If your Batavian Princes will suffer their Flanderkinne concubines to leap into other men's paddockes, who can adventure to enwarrant the produce to be of the bloode-royalle?"PAGE 167.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXIX—MADAME R—C—MIER.—"She in her sable tresses wore"Four shineing daggers, marvellouslie wroughte"For mann's subduing! Each sparklinge pointe"The blood-stained rubie gave; the fretted shaftes"Were studded o'er with blazing jewelrie,"Like Nighte's bright canopie surmounting all,"That slaves, which 'scaped the lighteninge of her eyes,"Her minor constellations might enswaye!"PAGE 44.—GENUINE.CCCXXX.—LADY EMILY W—SL—Y.—"Passinge through our holie Cloystere, I found my hande so suddenlie entangled betweene the two palmes of the younge Friar Lorenzo, that I could not disengage it before he had breathed upon it a love-spelle from his glowing lippes. He swore by his Alma Mater, that the Destinies had pre-ordained we should be one fleshe! Then talked he so wildlie of olive branches round about our table, that, to save the manne's poore wittes, I gave him my trothe, on condition that his noble friendes would teach his Reverence to down upon his knees with a better grace!"PAGE 194.—GENUINE.CCCXXXI.—MARQUIS C—NW—LLIS.—"Thirstlesse of bloode,"His harte approv'd no victorie complete,"Untille the woundes of those he had subdued"Were oiled, and bound by Charitie's fair hande!"Alike in councille, and th' embattled field,"Calmlie he moves.—Not prone to parlancie,"His wordes are rare, but, like his sworde,"Attempered firmlie to their pointe.—Since then,"The Soldier's clemencie, and Statesman's nerve,"In him by blendid potencie have giv'n"Assurance to the world of amitie,"The fadelesse laurel, wreath'd with olive branche,"Shall wave in triumph o'er his mural crowne!"PAGE 365.—GENUINE.EIGHTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.CCCXXXII.—LORD V—LL—RS.—"The Countesse, my Ladie-Mother, chucking me by the chinne the other morne, did whisper in mine ear, that if I was observant of her denotements, I might begette a childe that would make a man of me for the remainder of my daies! Moreover, she did subjoin, that she would condescend, her illustrious selfe, to become its nurse, and that with so politique an affection, as soon to make of it—a babe of grace!"PAGE 235.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXXIII.—MRS. L—Y—N.—"Had I been a Lyonesse that had devoured the laste cubbe of her litter, men could not stare upon me with more holiday eyes where-ever I move, or keepe themselves more circumspectlie without the pounce of my ponderous pawe!"PAGE 112.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXXIV.—EARL OF B—RKL—Y.—"When the bloode dothe runne riotouslie through noble veines, propelling to atchievements amorous, a sapient headed man will not betrothe his honourable selfe, but as he may be unyoked again after his owne free-wille and pleasure! Matrimonie, Sirs, should be as slight of weare as an holidaie bonnette that may be doffed off at one's ease; and not as a foole's-cappe to jarr the meade in perpetuitie by the jingling of its bells!"—PAGE 348.—GENUINE.CCCXXXV.—LADY L—C—N.—"I knowe you bind the coarser willes of men"To gainful purposes by wily artes;"But no base politie can regulate"The finer movements of a woman's soule!"Oh! presse not her obedience by rude strength;"For, though the weaker vessel, she will scorn"Such hateful vassalage, and ever strive"To break those sacrilegeous cordes in twaine"Which warp affection from a guileless course"That Nature pre-ordain'd!"—PAGE 18.—GENUINE.EIGHTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.CCCXXXVI.—LORD P—G—T.—"It likes me well, to see"The gallant Chieftaines of our envied isle"Pressing beyond the current of their bloode"To nobler fame!—That statelie youth who treades"Yon furrowed landes, now sleepes not on his arme"In bootlesse ease, but with unsullied steele"To ploughshare turn'd, tilleth the grateful soil,"So well it had defended!"—PAGE 104.—GENUINE.CCCXXXVII.—COUNTESS OF B—TH.—"Stand bye! and let this fraile, and fretted frame"Strive to disloade a pent-up minde within"Of the rich ponderance that weighs it downe!"Ah! what availes a superfluxe of wealthe,"Placed by the chilling hand of penurie"So safe, that ev'n one's own poore harte"Doth seeke in vaine to finde it!"PAGE 79.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXXVIII.—MR. N—C—LLS.—"Why trulie, Goodman Loquardo, the times are miserablie out of jointe!—I do remember well the daies, when the wordes of a wise manne were sought as precious jewelrie from far; but now are they most scoffinglie sette at nought! Marry, should you aske it of me, how they came so irreverentlie to expunge my powers politique from the forum, and the senate? Certes, I cannot tell: so let it passe! and the mischiefe fall upon their own heades. Nay, and it had not been for the weight of my imparlancies, the State had before this been lightlie overthrown by the windie machinations of the jibe-mongers, who did assaile it!"PAGE 36.—Not GENUINE.CCCXXXIX.—MRS. L—ML—Y S—V—LLE.—"Here, Limner, take your stande!"But in the giddie wiles of admiration,"Loose not the powers of your mimique arte."Now, while her tresses wantonne in the aire,"(As lothe a front divinelie arch'd to quitte"In hopelesse search of exaltation)"Trace a similitude of those faire formes"We are to gaze upon in purer realmes."And then let white-zon'd modestie encircle all"In one unrivall'd Grace!"PAGE 28.—GENUINE.EIGHTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXL.—MR. O—TO.—"'Twill sorelie greeve me, Sirs,"To bidde that worthie foreigner farewelle!"Who by true Christian politie hath staunch'd"The worlde's long-bleeding woundes!"But since vain GAULE demands her treasure backe,"See that his barque in peaceful triumph saile,"And by the pure breathed blessinges of our isle,"Be calmlie wafted to the Gallique shore!"PAGE 22.—GENUINE.CCCXLI.—DUCHESS OF ST. ALB—NS.—"I would to Fortune, that her Grace, my Lorde's great grand-damme,NELL GWYNNE. had caparizoned a nimbler steede, when, by her Sov'rain paramour's command, she did possesse, for amorous dowerie, as wide a space of this rich Isle, as in a faire daie's ride she could encircle: then might her descendant have boasted of more laundes, and beeves, and not been lefte the minor constellation in poore Charles's Waine!"PAGE 49.—Not GENUINE.CCCXLII.—ALDERMAN H—V—Y C—MBE.—"Hark ye! brother Cittes, but not fellow Citizens! I must be no more familiarlie entreated in Common Halle, but saluted by you at greate distance, as befittes a man of travelle. I have visited foreign climes—and within the walles of Paris held imparlance with HIM that makes Potentates tremble! Nay, he hath condescended to speake to me upon merchandize, and talked about Malte, and Hoppes, as though he had prime samples of both in his owne illustrious pockette! Moreover, he spoke most courteouslie of my personal endowments; saide that I was well favoured as the Regicide Brewer of his Capital, and seemed in his presence to carrie as goode a heade as could a pottle of my own browne stoute. So look well, that on the score of these my new acquirementes, I do receive some increase in your corporate obeisance!"PAGE 108.—GENUINE.CCCXLIII.—DOWAGER LADY D—CRE.—"Soone as the stilleste houre"The turrette clocke hath toulde, yon wickette opes,"From whence in vestment darker than the Nighte,"Alvina walkes her forth; and as the pathe"Of Miserie is straight, she quicklie gaines"The sacred Yewe that doth enshroude the tombe"Of her departed Lorde. On this sad shrine"Her widowed harte, still wedded, poureth out"The never ebbing torrente of her woes!"PAGE 88.—GENUINE.EIGHTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXLIV.—SIR JOHN EAM—R."Well! Heaven's good blessings uphold me, since, in admiration of my shineing partes, they do thrust such weightie affaires right bodilie upon me. Moreover, Sirs, they have elevated in our Citie's chief Mansion, a bedde of state for the honourable delight of my Ladie Spouse! I dream not their politique intending therein; but per-chaunce they do expect that I should bequeathe them, in return, some half-score of suckling Lordes Mayor, as the hereditarie fruite of their bountie!"PAGE 104.—GENUINE.CCCXLV.—LADY GEORGIANA C—V—D—SH."For mercie's sake, let not that faire Ladie smile with such redundancie of grace, nor fatten so vaste a congregation of dimples by incessant laughter, lest, in the supremacie of youthful fleshe, we may loose the bloode, and breede, of lovelie Devon!"PAGE 212.—Not GENUINE.CCCXLVI.—LORD F—LEY.—"I did expect that these NIMRODS of the Pichley chace had been trained to nobler dareings!—Mark how they stoppe at a vaulting leape, to calculate whether the pleasures of this worlde, or the nexte, are best worth seeking. These laddes might have rose in their stirruppes, had they not been borne with the neckes of green-girles, that require so much womanlie caution to preserve them!"PAGE 37.—GENUINE.CCCXLVII.—MRS. W—LK—R.—"Aye! faithful Albert,"Since fortune quittes our thresholde, few, alas!"With pale adversitie will enter here."While our gay doores on golden hinges daunc'd,"What swarmes of buzzing gadde-flies poured in"On proude and glittering wings to revel through"The celles with richest honie stored! Soone as"A cloude came o'er, away these insects flewe"Elsewhere to wanton in the gaudie sunne,"That hasteilie produc'd them!"PAGE 99.—Not GENUINE.EIGHTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXLVIII.—LORD CR—V—N."To Princelie diadems I ne'er shall soare"By flightes that tower'd my Ladie Mother up!"In Honour's bright, and laudable career,"I would adventure much. In everie clime,"Where the proude service of my Sov'rain calls,"On warring earth, or ever-raging seas,"I will, at least, be found obedient!"PAGE 184.—GENUINE.CCCXLIX.—HON. MISS F—X.—"In good soothe, neighbour, but she is most marvellouslie learned. Nay, 'twas but last Candlemass that she did be-pose three of our gravest Doctors in all Padua out of their own bookes in the black-letter!—As she hath been so favoured with the gifte of tongues, 'tis pitie that her Ladieship doth not vouchsafe to give the worlde some semblance of her honoured selfe, and not burie all her prattling powers in the profittlesse grave of the dead languages!"PAGE 74.—Not GENUINE.CCCL.—SIR BLAND B—RO—SS.—"No sooner had our Lorde the Kinge dub'bed him a Knighte, than, in a frolicke-some moode, he did bedubbe himselfe Knighte-errant to those jades, the Muses. Since this, he hath encreased in consequential stature so, that he hath out grown the cloathes that Nature, in a botching kind of way, had cut out for him. And, if you do not keepe this Sir DOGGEREL from inflating by the windie recitation of his owne numbers, he will be swoln until he litterallie burst!"PAGE 191.—GENUINE.CCCLI.—VISCOUNTESS H—OD."Aptlie to fashion forthe the female minde,"Lett that well-modell'd excellence remaine,"Which through a chearfull plenitude of yeares"Hathe lent a social grace to all around."Full halfe a centenarie she hathe walk'd"The even pathes of constancie, and truth."Oh! 'tis a pious sight, at life's calm ebbe,"To view affection able thus to trim"The slowlie-waneing lampe of wedded love!"PAGE 48.—GENUINE.EIGHTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLII.—EARL OF C—RL—SLE.—"I marvelle much Malverto, had his honour's Muse been of ignoble birthe, whether she would not have limp'd it on one legge through lyfe, like a scurvie minstrelle: but being caparisoned in gilded trappinges, the jade now prances with a loftie chreste, although she hathe not a single foote that's sounde to stande upon!"PAGE 188.—GENUINE.CCCLIII.—DUCHESS OF D—RS—T.—"I did not lay"My ducalle crownette 'neath his rising feete"To be abas'd: but since the giddie Courte"Of wanton France his presence dothe demand,"I'll follow closelie with a lynx's eye,"And from lascivious wiles protect him!"If a cold Russe, with limbes enfurr'd, could lure"His frame to amorous sympathie, may not"The warme excitements of some Circe Gaul,"By full expansion of her cloathlesse charmes,"Propell his frenzied harte to madnesse?"PAGE 44.—Not GENUINE.CCCLIV.—MR. C—B—E.—"That, Sirs, is the dapper Vintner of East-Cheape, whose animal spirittes are more friskie than his own outlandish wines newlie bottled!—Admire we his daintie grey Barbarie, which he got in barter of the Duke of Tunis for some score skinnes of excellent Canarie: Mark how he pads the pavement, doing dailie service to the Capital in riding matches through the streetes with the Prince's pennie-poste-boys, and befittinge himself in due time to become Purveyor-General of the petty bagge!"PAGE 5.—GENUINE.CCCLV.—COUNTESS OF OXF—D.—"Nay, my good Lorde,"You must not lay such trifles to a harte"That owes entire allegiance to mine."What is to me the levitie of mien,"Or loose-zon'd shape transparentlie display'd"By that Parisian dame you call my friend,"And you yourselfe so rapturouslie view;"I have no passions to be this way stirr'd,"No bloode that will in fev'rish current roll,"In sympathie so void of sense; therefore,"I praie you passe this tale of scandalle by!"PAGE 74.—Not GENUINE.EIGHTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLVI.—LORD ELL—NB—GH.—"I praie you, Sirs,"When at our barre of Justice you impleade,"Debase not heaven's fair gifte of eloquence"By wordes sophisticallie over-strain'd."—We've known the upright, plainlie-minded man,"So warpt from rectitude by this misrule,"This vile entanglement of simple sense,"That Virtue's meede hath been adjudg'd to Vice,"And Decencie hath fled our Courtes abash'd!"But, since by Fate's decree I have been call'd"The judgment seat of Justice here to fille,"Her sacred fount right watchfullie I'll guarde;—"Its course of puritie should downward flow;"And shame be-light on him, that would design"To sullie, or pervert it!"—PAGE 189.—GENUINE.CCCLVII.—LADY CATHARINE L—NG."Some one of you, who do administer in matters of Estate, I pray inform me, when may this same Bourbon House to its own domestic comforts be restored? To deale trulie with you, Sirs, I do stand in much neede of the restoration of mine owne House, that it may be well purged of some unseemlinesse, that with plain English manners doth but ill accord!"PAGE 22.—Not GENUINE.CCCLVIII.—EARL OF G—LF—D.—"Go to! I must incontinentlie have died with water on my chest, had they detained my bodie-corporate but another moone at their bathes of Palermo!—Now hie thee, boy, to the sign of the Goate with the gilded hornes, and search me out mine old friend the Knight of the merrie countenance;—tell him, that I have personallie imported some skinnes of dryed Canarie, the flavours of which will hit his savorie palate well, because he may drink of it to the amendment of his own life, scott-free!"PAGE 37.—GENUINE.CCCLIX.—LADY CAROLINE PR—CE."On light-foote tripping through the myrtle grove,"I saw her first in floating veste array'd,"Then 'twas with grace, and diffidence she touch'd"Apollo's lyre, and magically drewe"The fascinated Loves, and Graces round."PAGE 6.—GENUINE.EIGHTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLX.—EARL OF C—V—NT—Y.—"Nay, my goode Lord Abbotte, if you do still hunt after my poor temporalities, let it be done with a little more spiritual charitie. Although the remnant of my life be scant, I pray you await its last threade as may become your own Right Reverence! Ev'n the currier doth forbear to flaye the hide from off the backs, until the animal be lifelesse. When on the bedde of sicknesse you have lain, and asked renewal of your ebbing life, think by the forbearance of your Godde it hath been given to you, and the tender mercies of him, whose holie Minister you are!"PAGE 88.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXI.—LADY GEORGIANA G—RD—N.—"Come! dearest Ladie Mother, and let us hence for Padua; for my harte is sick to learn, why the love of Alberto so long doth linger! And were myself a man begirt with dirke, and doublette, no betrothed one of mine should so unreasonablie await for bridal salutation! Sithe, in obedience to your wille, I did be-mourn the deadlie departure of a fancied lover, help me now, I pray you, to enjoy the greeting of one, who swore he onlie lives for me!"PAGE 44.—GENUINE.CCCLXII.—SIR W. SC—TT.—"He rose not to the ermin'd seate he fills"Ungracefullie, as some vaine Chiefes have done,"Through syllogysmes dexterouslie rang'd,"Against the peaceful judgement of mankinde,"To wage eternal warre! He did ascend"By nobler steppes to his pre-eminence."The lore that truth's own eloquence bestow'd,"He hoarded not by any sordid crafte,"But did, with wide benevolence, diffuse,"To guard the sacred rights of lowlinesse"From the absorbing power of man's ambition."Who then more fitte, betwixt our Churche and State,"To holde remittlesse equipoize?"PAGE 204.—GENUINE.CCCLXIII.—MRS. M—RE."Why with a fatal 'wicherie of charmes"Did Nature so invest me, as to drawe"By the wilde guidelesse course of destinie"Man to his owne, and my undoing?"What penitence may do to drie away"The tears that have bedewed others' eyes,"For treason 'gainst the honour of its Lorde,"This breast, by ceaseless sorrow, shall atchieve,"Leaving the truant harte that wanton'd there,"To beat itself to apathie, and rest!"PAGE 112.—GENUINE.NINETIETH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXIV.—LORD WHITW—TH."Uxorious men do lesse of peril finde,"From mute obedience to the female wille,"Than in vaine striveings to obstruct its course!"Whether these visittes to the CONSUL's Dame,"In all the mockerie of Regalle state,"Befitte the prudence of my Duchesse Wife,"She best can say, who here should proxifie"Th' Imperial virtues, that with spotlesse fame,"So long have graced a female diademme."The rougher honours of our envied Isle"Are to my watchful care consign'd; and these,"Under the dauntlesse valour of her Sons,"I'll sturdilie uphold!"PAGE 58.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXV.—MISS AD—M.—"An I were Nature, and had so proudlie gifted you, I should have look'd for a more grateful return at your fair handes!—Come, come, my sweete ROWENA, you must unbend a little from this unprofitable severitie: and though you should have coldlie sworn those cherrie-coloured lippes to silence against me—bestow (as without offence to maiden modestie you may) some mute confession that my faithful love offends you not. Lend to my suit one sense, if but an ear, or by the little hope you've left me, I shall loose man's reasonable use of every one of my poor seven!"PAGE 99.—GENUINE.CCCLXVI.—LORD GLENB—VIE.—"Why, Sirs of Caledonia, do you marvelle at Don Avaro's shift of fortune, that hath transformed him into a mightier Man of the Woodes from a petty Laird of a barren mountain? Coming naked into a wide worlde, with such an itch for selfe-prosperities, he would have done thriftilie, even on the hill where London Citadelle doth stand, though he had been constrained to begge for a baubee standing upon one legge! Oh, Sirs, he prophecied arightlie, when he said that the readiest roade to every Paradise, save that of fooles, is by prayer and supplication, where that which is denied you on the score of charitie, you may extort by persecution."PAGE 39.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXVII.—LADY CAROLINE ST—WART."When to sam'd Ev'sham's fair, and fertile vale,"In envied bloome this lovelie plant's remov'd,"Free from the noxious blights that now prevaile,"Still be its native innocence retain'd!"But you, to whom indulgentlie 'tis given"So rare, and sweete a flowerette to save,"Be mindful of your charge.—If shelter'd ill,"The first proud rays of an ungenial sun"Will burn it up; or flatt'rie's pois'nous breathe"Infect it with disease, too dire and deep"For all the rough, and wholesome windes of heav'n,"Through keen adversitie, to drive away!"PAGE 185.—GENUINE.NINETY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXVIII.—MR. DUDLEY N—TH.—"Pooh! old man—'tis never too late to dissolve the icey bondage of an old Bachelor's life! Why, my own vane did continue to stande so long due Northe, that women began to sweare by their chastitie 'twas a burning shame! Since this, the wind of my better destinie hath veered about to a more genial corner, and now blowes me nuptial blessinges from the amorous Southe!"PAGE 88.—GENUINE.CCCLXIX—LADY T—MPLE—WN."—In soothe, she hath a roving eye"O'erlooking beauties prominentlie faire,"That do by witcherie decoy poore men"To gaze with madd'ning extacie upon them!"Anon, by quick, rebukeful glance, she calls"Their wildlie scatter'd senses backe again,"Obedientlie to virtue!"PAGE 189.—GENUINE.CCCLXX.—MR. T. SH—D—N."How it was good man Vardelt, that he became so preternaturallie gifted, he best can tell that made him; but certes he hath the animal worlde so aptlie at command, that he will drawe you all things living within the magicale circle of his vision! Nay, our race mortal he so swayeth by his arte persuasive, that he will transform everie other man's enemie into his own friende! Marry, whether it be on earth, in air, or water, 'tis all alike to faculties like his; for he doth deport himselfe so gracefullie on either, that your wild-pated women of qualitie, so delighting in his sportivenesse, do pull cappes with each other, which of them shall ascende with him to the upper regions, for foretaste of blisse celestial!—"PAGE 21.—GENUINE.CCCLXXI.—LADY C. H—M—LT—N.—"Nay, my good Lorde, and Sire!"Why do you presse me to adventure thus"Upon a voide so treacherouslie smoothe,"Whose glassie surface might in scorn reflect,"Whate'er mishap should lucklesslie ensue!"O! 'tis enough, in crooked times like these,"To keepe ones feete upon a slipp'rie worlde,"In which poore headlesse women sometimes fall,"Never to rise again! I praie you then,"That I may shake these dang'rous sliders off,"And rueful sorrowe thus avoid!"PAGE 33.—Not GENUINE.NINETY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXXII.—ARCHB—P OF CANT—B—Y.—"The goode Lorde Abbotte, ere our mattins closed,"Resign'd his pious breathe this morn to heaven,"Leaveing his poore remaines to be inurn'd,"And canonized by us on earthe!—Here comes"The Pontisse, whom our Sov'rain's will declares"His holie successor: Though noblie raced,"Methinkes this high pre-eminence he beares"As he would say, 'let me his foote-steps tread,'Who by a meeke, and Christian charitie,'Did make a Churchman's holie blessinge covetted.'—"So may the Crosier grace his hallowed hande,"And drawe his flocke in quietude around him!"PAGE 478.—GENUINE.CCCLXXIII.—SIR JAMES ST—G."—I pray you, brother soldiers, tell me, by what authoritie this same busie worlde would command a gallant Knighte, one trained to armes, to impose upon him the fulfillment of an obligation personalle? I have traversed long enough in this same worlde, to be able to know my owne wants and desires, and to regulate my pursuits accordinglie.—When I am tired of a life of single servitude, then may I, perhaps, enliste at the drum-heade of matrimonie as an uxorious Volunteere; but, Sirs! as I never could be goaded to felicitie by forced marches, so will it be difficult to prick me into any service by ballotte, or to enchain me even to the luxuries of an under-petticoate, as a miserable conscript."PAGE 572.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXIV.—LADY CATHARINE ST—W—T.—"Heard'st thou that bugle horne"Windinge its silverie summons through the aire?"Well might it sweetlie sounde,—for, hark! agen"How respiration through those lippes compresst"Dothe breathe delighte!—Let's to the mountain's browe,"Where faire Rowena points her glittering lance,"Eager her plumed column there to form!"PAGE 684.—GENUINE.NINETY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXXV.—MISS S—YM—R. (Piccadiliy.)"Now tell me, pray my I orde,"To whom with filial reverence I may bend,"And humblie supplicate a father's blessinge!"Strange and mysterious tales by stealthe I hear"About my birthe, which have perplex'd my minde,"And much disturb my youthful quietude!"Oft on my slattering mirrore do I looke,"And sometimes think a lineament I trace,"From which some featured semblance may arise,"To stampe me your's by more than cold adoption!"But soone the sieetinge vision fades away,"And cheques the fond aspiring of my harte!"PAGE 518.—GENUINE.CCCLXXVI.—SIR WM. P—LT—Y."Time was, Sirs, when a Gentleman of condition might have repaired an olde House, or taken to himselfe a young Wyse, without publique marvaille, or imparlance; but in these presumptuous daies, no man can adventure to caterre for his owne comfortes, without drawing a nest of witte crackers about his eares! Nay, the puppies will sometimes take your worke out of your handes, and fancifullie begettinge your chaste spouse with childe, make you father it for their owne lascivious amusement! In gravitie, I tell you, Sirs, these thinges are pushed beyond endurance!"PAGE 497.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXVII.—LADY B—RD—TT."Oh! barre our gapeing doores against those men,"Whose darken'd visages, and bloode-shotte eyes,"Declare their dreadful conspirations!—"Nay, my goode Lorde, upon my bended knees"I do conjure, that you no longer cloude"The gentle qualities, with which, in soothe,"Nature hath prodigallie deckt your minde!"Goode Heavens! how rudelie doth the outrage strike"Upon the chasteful ear of decencie,"When all that appertaines to your goode fame,"Is in your presence impiouslie profan'd"By tongues of wretches traitorouslie beleagu'd"For your's, and for our Country's ruin!—"Let me in tendernesse of love command"You goe not with them forth this nighte!"PAGE 483.—GENUINE.NINETY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXXVIII.—SIR CH—S B—NB—Y.—"An you match me that plaine-coated Knight o'th' Shire, then will I shew unto the worlde a pair of honest Senators worth their lookinge on! Why he doth hide his right hande in his bosome I trow not; for 'tis a clean one, and there's no danger but that his manlie harte will keepe in the right place, without manual assistance!"PAGE 564.—GENUINE.CCCLXXIX.—D—SS OF ST. A—N'S.—"No more heighos! good BLANCHE,"But bring my new-bespangled vestments forthe,"And let us gailie courte prosperitie!"Feel but the basie pendulum, that beats"So quicklie in this breaste! 'Twere pitie sure"To still this kind admonitor of blisse,"And weaklie sigh one's fondest hopes away."Beneath a bright, and mirthfulle planette born,"The pleasures of the moment let be mine"In all their wild varietie! and I"Will never trespasse on their sober joyes"Who seeke a luxurie in sadnesse!"—PAGE 378.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXX.—M—QUIS OF AB—N."I doe require, my Lordes, that since his worshippe is come over, he be cited straitlie to appear before us, in our full pontificalibus of British jurisprudence! Whatever be my portion of human frailtie, I will abstain from choler, if I may be permitted to catechize this sage upon his owne expoundings. Let our Sister Isle be taught by us to knowe, that our suprema Lex, which hath the power to take an Asiatique Pard by the beard, hath no fear of her little finger being snapped, by one of their bag'd FOXES!"PAGE 645.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXXI.—MISS M. G. E. S—YM—R.—"They will not beare me from you,"Now they doe know that you're my onlie mother!"For I will closelie cling me to your knees,"And with my teares be-pray them let me bide!"They can but break my little harte by force,"And surelie that would not delight their owne!"Oh! 'twould be crueler than Deathe itselfe"Which onlie took a goode I never knew;"For should they strippe me of your tender love,"They'd make GEORGINA motherlesse indeed!"PAGE 498.—GENUINE.NINETY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXXXII.—LORD D—RSL—Y.—"Strange! that the nuptial knotte"Which our progenitors have doublie tied,"Should be unloosed, not able to sustain"Their first begotten!—Nay, this morn I've heard"My brother vauntinglie doth tell the worlde"That I am but The eldest son was singularly given the Christian name of "Lord D—rsl—y." baptismallie a Lorde,"While he by warmer courtesie of state"Can paramountlie sorde it over me!"But since from the same mould of passion cast"I bear wild Nature's first impression—"I'll yield no auncient honours of my house"To any seconde brother's usurpation!"PAGE 498.—GENUINE.CCCLXXXIII.—LADY D—DL—Y AND W—RD.—"I like your vocal musique reasonablie well, so it be well-timed, and breathe not too colde an aire upon the comfortes of a warm dinner:—nay, when the clothe be drawn away, I can hear your 'non nobis,' my Lorde, with tolerable endurance, if it be accompanied in right glee with goode harmonique glasses!"PAGE 576.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXXIV.—EARL C—D."Go to! I tell thee he feedeth not within the purlieus of the Courte, argal he cannot be dubbed the KINGE's Jester! He may sometimes cracke small jokes within the privie presence, to make his master smile, yet hath he no patent royalle for the manufactorie of broad grinnes!—Seest thou that double ell of watered tabbie clinging so closelie to his noble shoulder? Marry, but that is the silken reward of brave doings, such as your swaggering Knights-Errant of Salamanca had never the witte to dream of!"PAGE 474.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXXV.—LADY HARRIET C—V—ND—SH.—"Adown the mazie daunce"See how enchantinglie she floates, making"Her wanton gazers giddie with delighte!"Such amorous time her playful feet do beate,"That not a pulse which vibrates from man's harte"But with them nimblie paces!"PAGE 632.—GENUINE.NINETY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCLXXXVI.—LORD VIS—T. M—LV—LE."Since the lawe of the realme hath provided me a coate of mail, you may presse me to the torture, without wringing from me such responses as I am not disposed to bestowe. When I did lend my hande to enacte a statute to restraine certain Lordes, and courtlie men from picking and stealing from the granarie of the publique, I looked not to be found at the Barne-door winnowing of its corne myself! Yet do I with contrite shame remember me of one Sir Ol ver Spintext, who, ill-placing his ladder against the arm of a fructifying tree, did saw it off, and thus brought himself to the ground by his own handicrafte operations!"PAGE 379.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXXVII.—SIR BEAUMONT H—TH—M.—"So from man's judgment seat"May everie sage in wisdome steppe him down,"Ere in the pure, but palsied hand of Justice"The ballance 'gins to tremble!—"Let care be taken of his ermin'd robes,"That future Judges of our Isle may see"How spotlesse they've been worn!"PAGE 548.—GENUINE.CCCLXXXVIII.—MRS. LY—N."I passed this morn a Lybian Lyoness in our forest, who, by the sleeknesse of her skinne, and the rotunditie of her form, seemed providentlie catered for, although she was attended by no provider.—Oh! she was a comelie creature, and wonderfullie well shaped to keep all mortal travellers at awful distance!"PAGE 486.—Not GENUINE.CCCLXXXIX.—COUNTESS OF M—RA.—"Yes, well I knew"The rough, or silken bondage was for life,"And therefore proudlie chose him from his peeres!"—By manlie virtues more ennobled far"Than all the lineal honours of his House,"On whom could I so permanentlie place"The fond assurance of my virgin faithe?"PAGE 523.—GENUINE.NINETY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXC.—MR. ANG—ST—N."Madam, I doe thank your Highnesse for your counselle, although I could have dispensed with it most willinglie. True, you have a daughter of your owne; but she is guarded by the State against such actes of disobedience—mine hath espoused a Russe without consent or privitie of me! If he hath all the savage virtues of SIBERIA's clime, what then? I shall not thither to behold their lustre. I have been the creator of mine owne fortune, and therefore must be allowed to be the dispenser of it after my own humour.—To say trulie, Madam, my mind is so settled on this point, that I do beseech your Highnesse I may be no more entreated!"PAGE 456.—Not GENUINE.CCCXCI.—DUCHESS OF S—M—RS—T."Though prodigallie stored with worldlie charmes,"She doth comporte herselfe with such a winning grace"In this frail, flaunting age, that it doth looke"As though in better daies, she had been left"A model for her way-ward sexe, by which"They might reshape themselves to virtuous seeming!"PAGE 587.—GENUINE.CCCXCII.—SIR HARRY P—YT—N."Heigh over, slack-ones!—forward!—hark forward! for now we'll make our play, and leave yon blowing Cocknies of the chace! May he who rides not this high-scenting day, as the foxe lays out his brushe right straight an end, be banished from our Pichley hunt; and the man that regards his necke beyond his renowne, let him ever after whip-in but to a welter's packe!"PAGE 463.—GENUINE.CCCXCIII.—MARCHIONESS OF S—FF—D.—"Well, my Lorde Abbotte,"Since you must have our sex's restlesse soules"Within your holie keepinge, shew them, praie,"Some tenderness in Christian charitie!—"Time was, when absolution did fore-run"Our tongue's soliciting; but pennance now"It seems, must ev'n out-step transgression!"Yet since it be your ordinance divine,"That no sweet sound upon a Sabbathe eve"Shall harmonize a Christian dwelling, I'll"Bend me to it with all the grace I can!"PAGE 372.—GENUINE.NINETY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXCIV.—SIR HOME P—PH—M."Helm hard a lee! good master!—and we shall weather the rest of these d—d breakers under our bow!—the skie grows less dirtie, and the squawle abates:—give her another smart shake in the winde, and she'll right herselfe, I'll warrant you!—Though poore Pharoah, and his hoste were swallowed up in this Red Sea, we'll scud safelie through it without an anchor left on board us!—There! steadie—my hearty, steadie!—now she lies her faire course for Old Englande—where we have onlie to buffet some foul windes, and cross currents, under close reefed top-sailes,—and we gain our port at last!"PAGE 369.—GENUINE.CCCXCV.—MRS. P—NT—N (ci-devant MISS G—BB—NS)."Come, Sir! mount, and away! Since it hath pleased Heaven to lay your old roan Barbarie under the turfe, we'll freelie enjoy the sportes that are above it! I'll try your bottom over the Beacon neck and neck, and, notwithstanding you are aged, you shall be beaten dead hollow by sheer bloode, although I carry weight for inches!"PAGE 486.—Not GENUINE.CCCXCVI.—MARQUIS OF H—NTL—Y.—"He beares a nearlie mortal wounde"As dothe befitte the daring mind that sought it,"Proud to devote an honourable life"To death for Britain's glorie!—When he moves,"See how the veteran doth gaze upon him,"And with an overflowing eye declare,"That by his gallant side one slaughtering daie"He fought his way to victorie—and now"Enjoies its enviable fruit, deriv'd"So cheeringlie from his munificence!"—PAGE 647.—GENUINE.CCCXCVII.—MISS B—CKF—D."Oh, Sir! If you're of true Castillian race,"List not to cruel vowes which fathers make"Against their children's peace! I praie you go,"And in your own strange countrie, coldlie wed"The hopeless maiden you have never woo'd;"For my poore virgin harte is here betroth'd,"And from it's bleedinge seat must first be torne,"Ere it can swerve from its allegiance!"PAGE 572.—GENUINE.NINETY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCXCVIII.—MARCHIONESS OF B—K—M."Forthe from yon cloister'd doore see Ella comes"Absolv'd of all the frailties of our fleshe,"Fitted for instant transit to the skies,"Or to renew the sublunarie joies"Of this vain worlde, as Heaven may ordaine!"—Sweete purifying faith, that can recloathe"The mind in all its virgin innocence,"And leave the harte to 'gin its daily workes"Of dalliance anew!"—PAGE 563.—Not GENUINE.CCCXCIX.—SIR HOME P—PH—M.—"Sirs, I would move"In just respecte to our brave Countrymen,"That in their absence we forbear to judge them!"Still in arraie to meete an hostile race"And front them bearde to bearde, oh! let us not"Assail them serving in a foreign clyme"By random shotte, lest we ourselves should prove"A direr foe, by wounding their faire fame,"Than those who but encounter 'gainst their lyfe."Victors or vanquish'd, let them home return"Ere we by senatorial voice decree"Our Countrie's meede of honour, or of blame!"PAGE 44.—Not GENUINE.CCCC.—DUKE OF N—RF—K."It is said they doe intend to investe my bodie corporate with some elles more of ribband garter-blew, than be required for the encompassment of an ordinarie Courtier: marry and so they ought, for in their politicalle warfare I have been most scurvilie entreated! Did they not wrest from me my pyke martial at the heade of mine own trained bande, and cashier me in the broad face of noon-tide day? Nay, an their power had been commensurate with their wille, they would unmarshally have despoiled me of my truncheon to boote. And now would they weedle me into a forgetfulnesse of my wronges forsoothe! But little do they know of that bloode which they have enchaffed, or of my woundes, which are too deep for all their Courte-plaister to cover them."PAGE 321.—GENUINE.CCCCI.—HON. MRS. ED. T—YL—R.—"Like it, Marcella?"Oh! 'tis a little Heaven upon Earthe!"For one whole weeke I've been a wedded wyfe,"And by my wooing husbande, girl, am call'd"His lovelie angelle still! If marriages"Were all thus doublie sweete, I'm very sure"The honied moone wou'd then for ever shine"So bright both daie and night, and prove so warm,"That the olde fashion'd sunne would soone be found"An useless planette in the spheres of Love!"PAGE 278.—GENUINE.HUNDREDTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCCII.—MR. B—SV—LLE."These are no times, my busie masters, to waste in dulle forbearance! Have they not tinkered our Constitution politique until more lioles are hammered through it, than the countrie has solder left to sear over—or they have the workeman-like skille to mend? In the abundant love I doe beare this isle, I did recommend to them a nimble-fingered tailor, who, an they had let him go thorough stitcke with the worke, would soone have given it a new bodie-lininge of fustainne everlasting;but they have entreated him with scorne, by refusing him a cross-legged seate on the shoppe-boarde of the State, lest he should witn—ess how they doe cut the countrie's clothe against the graine to satisfie their own abominable hunger after cabbage!"PAGE 100.—GENUINE.CCCCIII.—MRS. B—RN—Y.—"Did I not tell thee, my little Coz, that we should hacke the spurres from off the heeles of our wou'd-be knights o' th' shire?—and have we not triumphantlie atchieved it? And now, goode Yeomanrie of Norfolke, mark that you abstaine from your hotte buttered dumplinges until your suffrages be dulie enregistered; for not a manne of you shall dare taste so much as would breake the faste of a cocke-sparrowe, before we of the fairer sexe are more decentlie entreated, or by the womman's spirit that stirs within us, you shall pay as dearlie for it, as in their utmost rigour, the lawes parliamentarie can inflicte!"PAGE 462.—Not GENUINE.CCCCIV.—DUKE OF B—DF—D."What dignitie from his fraile power can manne"Derive, save where he tempers it aright"With Christian clemencie?—What eye e'er sawe"The Regent's sceptre in true lustre sway'd,"If by one goutte of subject-bloode distain'd"That wisdome might have spar'd?"O! 'tis a god-like ministering to calme"A frenzied nation into bonds of peace,"Rather than goade them on to deedes of madnesse!"A diadem sitts heavie on the browe,"Unless 'tis ermin'd with a people's love."PAGE 614.—GENUINE.HUNDRED AND FIRST DAY's TRIAL.CCCCV.—LORD CHAN. E—K—NE.—"In soothe, that noblie-gifted Scotte"Doth bravelie bear this worlde's prosperitie!"There were amongst your Senators who thought"That when the buoyant powers of his minde"Had soar'd him to pre-eminence of state,"He would grow giddie on the flatt'ring height,"And loose the distant objects left belowe."Vaine all those feares! No tie of amitie"Is rudelie broke, nor has he sacrific'd"One social feelinge of his harte to pride."So wiselie plac'd on high, with potent sway"To regulate the interests of mankinde,"And shielde the weaker from the gripe of might,"Safe in his custodie may be repos'd"A Sov'raine's conscience with a people's rightes.!"PAGE 37.—GENUINE.CCCCVI.—DUKE OF R—CH—D.—"Why should that blinde jade Fortune bejiit a man out of his natural comfortes, by loading him with honours which he sought not for? Banish'd the Smoaking Roome o' the Commones by the power of mine own dignitie, it will be expected, I suppose, that I doe besitte myselfe for better companie:—So, boye, lay the Trinidada sparinglie before me, and plye me not so plentifullie with stoopes of drie Canarie, that I may abridge myselfe of deep potations; for when a man is made perforce a Duke puissante, it would be unseemlie in him to become as—as an ordinarie Lorde!"PAGE 212.—Not GENUINE.CCCCVII.—LADY BL—KE."Here on this close-nipt heathe, a stout jack-hare"We'll finde, that has not prodigal'd his strengthe"Away by amorous freakes—Minde, boye, this brace"You slippe aright, and see they do not hange"Like an ill-coupled man and wyfe, who fain"Would bolt from their restraint, and swerve"A separate course. 'Soho! Sir PAT we've found!'"And now against your foul-stern'd cross-bred dun,"My snowe-white Helen will I backe for speede,"Or the first-turne, or through the lengthen'd course,"With all the ducattes my poore purse commandes!"PAGE 184.—GENUINE.HUNDRED AND SECOND DAY's TRIAL.CCCCVIII.—MR. ROBT. T—NT—N."To speake plainlie to you, and not after the manner of the Scribes, the Pharisees, or the Hypocrites, these same Committee-men Select do prie themselves too sedulouslie into the secret intentions of the faithful. I myselfe was placed by them into a boxeA place elevated for the more open examination of witnesses on suspicious matters in Senatorial Elections.—MALONE. not made of Shittim-woode, and there, like unto one of the unchosen, most familiarlie interrogated on pointes of political faith, to which no Christian man endowed with saveing knowledge could in prudence make replie. Trulie, Sirs, if the consciences of the ELECT are to be thus thrown into one common purgatorie with those of ordinarie transgressors, it will become difficult hereafter to distinguish betwixt Sainte, and Sinner!"PAGE 385.—Not GENUINE.CCCCIX.—COUNTESS C—YNG—M.—"What mortalle man"In visionarie transporte could behold"A fairer being by his fancie form'd?—"At Gallia's bloode-stain'd Courte, I saw her move"Love's second Goddesse in such spell-full guise,"That he who an affrighted world enslaves"Bent captive at her feete! Oh! had she known"The power of her charmes, she might have sway'd"The way-ward tyrante to her wille, and smil'd"The worlde againe to peace!"PAGE 203.—GENUINE.CCCCX.—SIR JOHN P—RS.—"No sooner had I made perambulation of Man's Isle with right valorous celebritie, than my warme imagination be-stirred itselfe, to trie how far the Continent of the female worlde might with safetie be explored. In this research faire ARABELLA cross'd my roveing view, of whose glowing charmes I thought to take an hastie, and a secret sketche; but as mine evil Genius wou'd ordaine, upon the gilded roofe of her privie chamber, a scurvie dauber from Salamancha did sit perch'd; who, as I advanced in my amorous design, took him a villainous copie of all my warmest colouringes! On this, I was most indecentlie arraigned on charge of covert-acie against the state connubial, and condemned in penal summes, too excessive for man of honour to liquidate, or of dignitie to notice.—Thus in daies of yore, was a proud Venetian of Virtu amerced by a tyranique Senate in seven thousand ducattes ten times told, for kindlie breathing on the precious jewelle of a noble friende, to prove for him whether, as he supposed, it was without flawe, or blemishe!"PAGE 77.—GENUINE.HUNDRED AND THIRD DAY's TRIAL.CCCCXI.—SIR JOHN ANST—R."I cross'd a lean, and warie Scotte upon the sultrie coaste of Malabarre, seeking for gold duste with an eager eye. In his left hande he bore a paire of scales most dexterouslie poised, like unto those which do bedeck the dexter arme of Justice. Marry, quoth I, if men in everie clime become sole Judges of their actions, why not weigh out their own deservinges by poundes avoirdupoise, without tarrying untill the ballance be made to tremble with graines, or scruples?"PAGE 87.—Not GENUINE.CCCCXII.—MISS GEORGINA C—V—T—Y, (NOW MRS. B—NES.)—"On Love's adventurous winge"Have I not ta'en a rash, and heedlesse slighte?"Old Scotia's mountains darklie scowle around,"And with their icicles but coldlie seale"The transient blisse we've come so far to seeke!"Oh! 'tis a deede that sadlie will inflame"The noble bloode from whence GEORGINA sprang!"Long from their sightlesse eyes by fate estrang'd,"Was't not my dutie that I should remaine"A hopeful vision floating in their minde?"PAGE 294.—GENUINE.CCCCXIII.—THE REV. EARL N—LS—N.—"When of necessitie they transformed me into a Lorde Temporalle of this Isle for no well doing of mine owne, they did conspire to unfrocke me of my canonicalles prebendal! Not so, my Lordes, quoth I! you may drive an Oxe from rich pasturage, and even goade an Asse from his bunch of thistles, but you cannot prick a true Churchman from the stalle in which he hath been well fed. So unlesse you do force upon me a Bishopricke to boote, I shall continue to chaunte a requiem for the soul of the relative that made me, as an humble Abbotte of Canterburie!"PAGE 507.—GENUINE.HUNDRED AND FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCCXIV.—LORD GR—NV—LLE."Right Noble Lordes! the height of mine offence"Hath been, that I too tolerantlie strove"By one convenient, and dispensing faithe"To bind in Christian politie our Isles."On this, some meddling Hierarchists rose,"And on their crooked crosiers swore, that I"By a fell rosarie's absolving beades,"Held Catholique communion with the Pope,"And, by my proxie kist his mystique toe!"Then with hotte irons from their priestlie flames,"They sear'd the tender conscience of his Liege,"So that to my amazement, it became."Insensible to every loyal touche"Which all my arte chirurgique could essay!"In sine, these sturdie Churchmen have prevail'd,"And by their holie priesterafte wrought my fall!"So SOLOMON's, proud Temple was o'erthrown"To sette up idols made of stockes, and stones!"PAGE 478.—GENUINE.CCCCXV.—LADY H—M—LT—N."Ah, Blanche! the worlde's inquisitors but little know of me! If I did think this deeplie wounded harte could beat again in sympathie with aught that wooing man could say, I'd tear the trait'rous inmate from its seat, a bleedinge sacrifice to plighted love!—Bring, girl, my mournful lute, that I may call his listening spirit down to hear those straines which he alone inspired!"PAGE 564.—Not GENUINE.CCCCXVI.—GENERAL KN—WLES, [Commonly called EARL OF B—NB—RY.]"Why, brother Soldiers, if a man in these wonderworkinge daies cannot ennoble himselfe, he is fitte onlie to dreame o' nights of coronettes, and go bare headed for want of one, all the daies of his lyfe! Moulde but the dough of mankind to your wille, and you shall find no more arte required to make a modern Lorde, than a Banburie Cake!"PAGE 308.—GENUINE.HUNDRED AND FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.CCCCXVII.—MR. BR—ND.—"I saw just now a cholerique youthe running with a fire-brand towards the Capitolle! Stay, rash boy, quoth I, for you do bear in that left hande what may consume our citie into ashes. Yet on with heedlesse steppe went he, enchafinge the fierie mischief with his breath, until its violence (by Providence decreed) dispers'd the sparkes it meant not to extinguish!"PAGE 456.—Not GENUINE.CCCCXVIII.—HON. MRS. D—R.—"Of Parian marble bring a massie blocke,"And by my chisselle's wonder-working pow'r"I'll shape with sweet and counterfeited grace"The Papbian Queen so witchinglie to life,"With all Love's sexual attractions,"That the full pulse of him who gazes on it"Shall rise, and beat in tumult of delighte!"Next manhoode's bolder beauties I will trace"And sculpture forthe, that bashful modestie"Shall eye askance, and blushinglie proclaim,"The fire of Nature in the worke of Arte!"PAGE 546.—GENUINE.END OF VOL. IV.ADDENDA.DRAMA.GREEN-ROOM SELECTIONS, [From the last new-discovered Old Trunk, containing the Posthumous Works of SHAKESPEARE.]I.—BY MR. KEMBLE."Like others of Godde's creatures, he's a man"Of oddities compounded, fancying"That witte can yielde, what Nature doth deny!"It will not him suffice to read you men,"Or bookes, as by the ordinarie mode"Imprinted; for he'll sitte you up whole nightes"To punctuate a petty worde awry,"And straine a meaninge that was never meant!"And yet, can he enacte you noble deedes"That soone obliterate these trite desectes."How well dothe he assume the Chieftain's mien;"On whose ill-fated browe misfortune lowers?"Or him, whose deeplie lacerated pride"Hath turn'd abhorrent from the human race,"Pourtraying in some lineaments himselfe,"Whose minde is prone instinctivelie to hate"The knavish sycophancie of mankinde!"PAGE 187.—GENUINE.II.—BY MRS. JORDAN."Why dost thou foolishlie chew the cudde of melancholie, man, when thou mayest betake thee to you boothe of comicalle enactors, and be most pleasantlie purged of it for half a ducatte? There mark thee well a sprightlie jade, who dothe turne mens hartes, until she gettes the best humoured side of them uppermost; nay, her merit halts not here, for when her mirthful vizard is thrown by, she wears the Mr. MALONE has thus observed on this passage:—"This was an amiable Comic Actress in the reign of ELIZABETH, not less admired for her benevolence, than her superiority in the comic art; for while the most eminent of her sisterhood attended only to self-aggrandizement, she humanely lent the aid of her fascinating talents to succour the distresses of all around her." veil of charitie with so goode a grace, that the invidious even of her own sexe, can scarcelie spie a blemish underneath it!"GENUINE.III.—BY MR. M—ND—N.—"I sawe last Martinmasse, just such another odde countenanced varlette with his huge whiskers, dauncing a sarabande at the sign of the Old Catte and Bagpipes in Lothburie! The knave, with follies enough of his owne, could give you the counterfeit resemblance of all those appertaining to other men, having been a skip-jacke in divers comical professions, from a mender of mouse-trappes up to his present vocation. In the downie daies of his youthe, he was a plucker of pen-feathers to a Poulterer in Leadenball, and there stripped he the winges of tame grey-geese sufficient to endow him to become scrivener to a lean lawyer, and to engrosse his deedes of darknesse in black letter; but inding it not so pleasant to play the rogue as the foole, now goes he about from tythinge to tythinge, and makes brave earninges by letting out wry faces to full-mouth'd visitors, who can swallowe nothing but on the broad grinne!"PAGE 486.—GENUINE.IV.—MRS. S—DD—NS.—"Stoppe here my Lordes awhile,"And viewe this tragique paragonne passe by,"Who, rob'd in all the counterfeites of woe,"Deludes the noblest passions of the minde."Mark well those features to her purpose form'd"And supernaturallie so combin'd,"That by their piteous workinges on the soul,"They do betray it to the verge of madnesse!"Griefe sittes so wildlie picted on her browe,"That she seemes agoniz'd until she plead"In Charitie's deserted cause, and save"The remnant of some haplesse race from ruin!"Strange, how the wiles of this resistlesse arte"Should guise her mimick semblances so well,"That she can drawe from everie gazer's eye"The tear of pitie, which she never sheddes!"PAGE 433.—GENUINE.V.—BY MR. J. B—NN—ST—R."Thou sayest trulie, Goodman Spadro!—Nature doth not mould us such comical wagges everie day in the yeare.—Marry, but it doth require something more than an ordinarie-witted fellowe, to plaie the foole to his own proffittinge, and stille keepe a goode humoured worlde his debitor! Marvel thee not, man, for he hath endowed himselfe with qualities sussicient to enacte the parte of a wise man sans imitation. When the merrie rogue is pleased to throw his dark eyes incontinentlie around him, if you had nine pair of sides, he would shake them all with laughter!—No varietie hath a voice that he cannot purloine—nor a face that he will not borrowe, and humourouslie wear it over his owne! nay, I have known him to ape a Jewe so well, that you would swear he did not possess one Christian virtue by natural inheritance; and yet no sooner dosss he his artificialle doublette, than he hies him to his own fire side, and there performes those partes This passage is supposed to allude to an Actor of those times, who rendered himself rather singular in his profession, by paying a moral regard to the relative duttes of a husband—a father—and a friend! MALONE. which enactinge cannot counterseit!"PAGE 597.—GENUINE.VI.—BY MISS BR—NT—N.—"I dreamt last nighte, that o'er my virgin browe,"In magical suspence, a crownette hung,"Courting my busie hande to pluck it downe!"It was with saphires, and with rubies deckt,"And intermixt with emeraldes so bright,"That it did lure my sillie fancie on;"Till by a purer light I spied therein"A pointed thorne in ermin'd ambushe lie!"At sight of this, with sudden start I woke,"When the delusion vanisht with the dreame,"And left my little, vaine, aspiring harte"To sigh itselfe again to calme repose!"PAGE 248.—GENUINE.VII.—BY MR. EL—ST—N."In veritie, his talents like me more than passinge well; for he doth wear, and shifte his masque with so adroite a skille, that he can give men better semblances of what is fraile, or perfect in their nature, than most of his compeers have ev'n the witte to dreame of! I have seen him enacte the Mad Lover with so amorous a phrenzie, that you would sweare the fellow had lost the whole of his seven senses in a lascivious rencontre about the hemminge of an under petticoate! Marry but he can traine you a Ladie Bryde in the well-feigned schoole of adversitie better than any man John of them, and tame a young shrewe i' the budde, by bending her to a right obedient wyfe, before the honie moone be waned! Then will he restore her to the honours of his House with so high a grace, that he doth make it questionable by his pourtraying arte, whether his Prince, or Peasante be the nobler man!"PAGE 472.—Not GENUINE.VIII.—BY MRS. HENRY J—NST—N.—"Borne (when an infant grace) on flying steede,"I've seen her vaulted from her father's arme,"Like a sweete cherubbe coursing through the air,"Portentous of her fame.—Behold her near;"'Tis not a fancied form of lovelinesse,"Or charmes by scenic artifice array'd"To cheate men into adoration;"But that unveil'd presentment of herselfe,"Which women envie, and mankind adore!"Who then can marvelle, if, at times be seen"A troope of suitors in her 'witching traine,"Each by some wilie arte intent to drawe"One sigh from her, to fanne his fonde desire?"PAGE 468.—GENUINE.THE END.