BELL'S EDITION. The POETS of GREAT BRITAIN COMPLETE FROM CHAUCER to CHURCHILL.SHENSTONE, VOLUME II.And tears bedew her tender eye,To think the playful Kid must die!The Dying KidMortimer del.Grignion sculp.Printed for John Bell near Exeter Exchange Strand London Sept: 1778.THE POETICAL WORKS OF WILL. SHENSTONE.IN TWO VOLUMES.WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR, AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE LEASOWES.—Saepe ego longosCantando puerum memini me condere soles.VIRG.IMITATION.—Right well I call to mindWhen (yet a boy) whole suns and lengthen'd daysI oft' employ'd in chanting sylvan lays.Yet while he woo'd the gentle throng,With liquid lay and melting song,The list'ning herd around him stray'd,In wanton frisk the lambkins play'd,And every Naiad ceas'd to laveHer azure limbs amid the wave:The Graces danc'd; the rosy bandOf Smiles and Loves went hand in hand,And purple Pleasures strew'd the wayWith sweetest flow'rs; and every rayOf each fond Muse with rapture fir'd,To glowing thoughts his breast inspir'd;The hills rejoic'd, the vallies rung,All Nature smil'd while SHENSTONE sung.VERSES by —VOL. II.EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1778.THE POETICAL WORKS OF WILLIAM SHENSTONE.VOL. II.CONTAINING HIS ODES, MORAL PIECES, &c. &c. &c.Ill was he skill'd to guide his wand'ring sheep,And unforeseen disaster thinn'd his fold,Yet at another's loss the swain would weep,And for his friend his very crook was sold—He lov'd the Muse; she taught him to complain;He saw his tim'rous loves on her depend;He lov'd the Muse, altho' she taught in vain;He lov'd the Muse, for she was Virtue's friend—He wish'd for wealth, for much he wish'd to give;He griev'd that virtue might not wealth obtain:Piteous of woes, and hopeless to relieve,The pensive prospect sadden'd all his strain.I saw him faint! I saw him sink to rest!Like one ordain'd to swell the vulgar throng;As tho' the Virtues had not warm'd his breast,As tho' the Muses not inspir'd his tongue.ELEGY III.EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1778.ODES, &c.ODE TO HEALTH, 1730.O HEALTH! capricious maid!Why dost thou shun my peaceful bow'r,Where I had hope to share thy pow'r,And bless thy lasting aid?Since thou, alas! art flown,It 'vails not whether Muse or Grace,With tempting smile, frequent the place;I sigh for thee alone.Age not forbids thy stay;Thou yet might'st act the friendly part;Thou yet might'st raise this languid heart;Why speed so swift away?Thou scorn'st the city-air;I breathe fresh gales o'er furrow'd ground,Yet hast not thou my wishes crown'd,O false! O partial Fair!I plunge into the wave;And tho' with purest hands I raiseA rural altar to thy praise,Thou wilt not deign to save.Amid my well-known grove,Where mineral fountains vainly bearThy boasted name and titles fair,Why scorns thy foot to rove?Thou hear'st the sportsman's claim,Enabling him, with idle noise,To drown the Muse's melting voice,And fright the tim'rous game.Is thought thy foe? Adieu,Ye midnight lamps! ye curious tomes!Mine eye o'er hills and vallies roams,And deals no more with you.Is it the clime you flee?Yet 'midst his unremitting snowsThe poor Laponian's bosom glows,And shares bright rays from thee.There was, there was a time,When tho' I scorn'd thy guardian care,Nor made a vow nor said a pray'r,I did not rue the crime.Who then more bless'd than I?When the glad schoolboy's task was done,And forth, with jocund sprite, I runTo freedom and to joy?How jovial then the day!What since have all my labours found,Thus climbing life to gaze around,That can thy loss repay?Wert thou, alas! but kind,Methinks no frown that Fortune wears,Nor lessen'd hopes nor growing cares,Could sink my cheerful mind.Whate'er my stars include,What other breasts convert to pain,My tow'ring mind should soon disdain,Should scorn—Ingratitude!Repair this mould'ring cell,And bless'd with objects found at home,And envying none their fairer dome,How pleas'd my soul should dwell!Temperance should guard the doors;From room to room should Mem'ry stray,And, ranging all in neat array,Enjoy her pleasing stores—There let them rest unknown,The types of many a pleasing scene;But to preserve them bright or clean,Is thine, fair Queen! alone.TO A LADY OF QUALITY, FITTING UP HER LIBRARY, 1738.AH! what is science, what is art,Or what the pleasure these impart?Ye trophies which the learn'd pursueThro' endless fruitless toils, adieu!What can the tedious tomes bestow,To sooth the miseries they show?What like the bliss for him decreedWho tends his flock and tunes his reed!Say, wretched Fancy! thus refin'dFrom all that glads the simplest hind,How rare that object which suppliesA charm for too discerning eyes!The polish'd bard, of genius vain,Endures a deeper sense of pain;As each invading blast devoursThe richest fruits, the fairest flow'rs.Sages, with irksome waste of time,The steep ascent of knowledge climb,Then from the tow'ring heights they scale,Behold Contentment range—the vale.Yet why, Asteria, tell us whyWe scorn the crowd when you are nigh?Why then does reason seem so fair,Why learning then deserve our care?Who can unpleas'd your shelves behold,While you so fair a proof unfoldWhat force the brightest genius drawsFrom polish'd wisdom's written laws?Where are our humbler tenets flown?What strange perfection bids us ownThat Bliss with toilsome Science dwells,And happiest he who most excels?ANACREONTIC, 1738.'TWAS in a cool Aonian gladeThe wanton Cupid, spent with toil,Had sought refreshment from the shade,And stretch'd him on the mossy soil.A vagrant Muse drew nigh, and foundThe subtle traitor fast asleep;And is it thine to snore profound,She said, yet leave the world to weep?But hush—from this auspicious hourThe world, I ween, may rest in peace,
And robb'd of darts, and stript of pow'r,Thy peevish petulance decrease.Sleep on, poor Child! whilst I withdraw,And this thy vile artill'ry hide—When the Castalian fount she saw,And plung'd his arrows in the tide.That magic fount—ill-judging maid!Shall cause you soon to curse the dayYou dar'd the shafts of Love invade,And gave his arms redoubled sway.For in a stream so wondrous clear,When angry Cupid searches round,Will not the radiant points appear?Will not the furtive spoils be found?Too soon they were; and ev'ry dart,Dipp'd in the Muse's mystic spring,Acquir'd new force to wound the heart,And taught at once to love and sing.Then farewell, ye Pierian quire!For who will now your altars throng?From love we learn to swell the lyre,And Echo asks no sweeter song.ODE. Written 1739.Urit spes animi credula mutui?HOR.IMITATION.Fond hope of a reciprocal desireInflames the breast.'TWAS not by Beauty's aid aloneThat Love usurp'd his airy throne,His boasted pow'r display'd;'Tis kindness that secures his aim,'Tis hope that feeds the kindling flame,Which Beauty first convey'd.In Clara's eyes the lightnings view;Her lips, with all the rose's hueHave all its sweets combin'd;Yet vain the blush, and faint the fire,Till lips at once, and eyes, conspireTo prove the charmer kind—Tho' wit might gild the tempting snareWith softest accent, sweetest air,By Envy's self admir'd;If Lesbia's wit betray'd her scorn,In vain might ev'ry Grace adornWhat ev'ry Muse inspir'd.Thus airy Strephon tun'd his lyre—He scorn'd the pangs of wild desire,Which love-sick swains endure;Resolv'd to brave the keenest dart,Since frowns could never wound his heart,And smiles—must ever cure.But, ah! how false these maxims prove,How frail security from loveExperience hourly shows!Love can imagin'd smiles supply,On ev'ry charming lip and eyeEternal sweets bestows.In vain we trust the fair one's eyes;In vain the sage explores the skies,To learn from stars his fate;Till led by fancy wide astray,He finds no planet mark his way;Convinc'd and wise—too late.As partial to their words we prove,Then boldly join the lists of love,With tow'ring hopes supply'd:So heroes, taught by doubtful shrines,Mistook their deity's designs,Then took the field—and dy'd.UPON A VISIT TO A LADY OF QUALITY, In winter 1748.ON fair Asteria's blissful plains,Where ever-blooming Fancy reigns,How pleas'd we pass the winter's day,And charm the dull-ey'd Spleen away!No linnet, from the leafless bough,Pours forth her note melodious now,But all admire Asteria's tongue,Nor wish the linnet's vernal song.No flow'rs emit their transient rays;Yet sure Asteria's wit displaysMore various tints, more glowing lines,And with perennial beauty shines.Tho' rifled groves and fetter'd streamsBut ill befriend a poet's dreams,Asteria's presence wakes the lyre,And well supplies poetic fire.The fields have lost their lovely dye,No cheerful azure decks the sky,Yet still we bless the louring day;Asteria smiles—and all is gay.Hence let the Muse no more presumeTo blame the winter's dreary gloom,Accuse his loit'ring hours no more,But, ah! their envious haste deplore.For soon from Wit and Friendship's reign,The social hearth, the sprightly vein,I go—to meet the coming yearOn savage plains and deserts drear!I go—to feed on pleasures flown,Nor find the spring my loss atone;But 'mid the flow'ry sweets of MayWith pride recall this winter's day.ODE TO MEMORY, 1748.O MEMORY! celestial maid!Who glean'st the flow'rets cropt by time,And, suffering not a leaf to fade,Preserv'st the blossoms of our prime,Bring, bring those moments to my mindWhen life was new and Lesbia kind.And bring that garland to my sightWith which my favour'd crook she bound,And bring that wreath of roses brightWhich then my festive temples crown'd,And to my raptur'd ear conveyThe gentle things she deign'd to say.And sketch with care the Muse's bow'r,Where Isis rolls her silver tide,Nor yet omit one reed or flow'rThat shines on Cherwell's verdant side,If so thou may'st those hours prolong,When polish'd Lycon join'd my song.The song it 'vails not to recite—But, sure, to sooth our youthful dreams,Those banks and streams appear'd more brightThan other banks, than other streams;Or by thy soft'ning pencil shown,Assume they beauties not their own?And paint that sweetly-vacant sceneWhen, all beneath the poplar bough,My spirits light, my soul serene,I breath'd in verse one cordial vow,That nothing should my soul inspireBut friendship warm and love entire.Dull to the sense of new delight,On thee the drooping Muse attends,As some fond lover, robb'd of sight,On thy expressive pow'r depends,Nor would exchange thy glowing lines,To live the lord of all that shines.But let me chase those vows awayWhich at Ambition's shrine I made,Nor ever let thy skill displayThose anxious moments, ill repaid:Oh! from my breast that season rase,And bring my childhood in its place.Bring me the bells, the rattle bring,And bring the hobby I bestrode,When pleas'd, in many a sportive ringAround the room I jovial rode;Ev'n let me bid my lyre adieu,And bring the whistle that I blew.Then will I muse, and, pensive, say,Why did not these enjoyments last?How sweetly wasted I the day,While innocence allow'd to waste!Ambition's toils alike are vain,But, ah! for pleasure yield us pain.VERSES Written towards the close of the year 1748, TO WILLIAM LYTTLETON, ESQ.HOW blithly pass'd the summer's day!How bright was ev'ry flow'r!While friends arriv'd, in circles gay,To visit Damon's bow'r!But now, with silent step, I rangeAlong some lonely shore,And Damon's bow'r, alas the change!Is gay with friends no more.Away to crowds and cities borne,In quest of joy they steer,Whilst I, alas! am left forlornTo weep the parting year!O pensive Autumn! how I grieveThy sorrowing face to see!When languid suns are taking leaveOf ev'ry drooping tree.Ah! let me not, with heavy eye,This dying scene survey!Haste, Winter! haste; usurp the sky;Complete my bow'r's decay.Ill can I bear the motley castYon' sick'ning leaves retain,That speak at once of pleasure past,And bode approaching pain.At home unbless'd, I gaze around,My distant scenes require,Where, all in murky vapours drown'd,Are hamlet, hill, and spire.Tho' Thomson, sweet descriptive bard!Inspiring Autumn sung,Yet how should we the months regardThat stopp'd his flowing tongue?Ah! luckless months, of all the rest,To whose hard share it fell!For sure he was the gentlest breastThat ever sung so well.And see, the swallows now disownThe roofs they lov'd before,Each, like his tuneful genius, flownTo glad some happier shore.The wood-nymph eyes, with pale affright,The sportsman's frantic deed,While hounds, and horns, and yells, uniteTo drown the Muse's reed.Ye Fields! with blighted herbage brown,Ye Skies! no longer blue,Too much we feel from Fortune's frownTo bear these frowns from you.Where is the mead's unsully'd green?The zephyr's balmy gale?And where sweet Friendship's cordial mien,That brighten'd ev'ry vale?What tho' the vine disclose her dyes,And boast her purple store?Not all the vineyard's rich suppliesCan sooth our sorrows more.He! he is gone, whose moral strainCould wit and mirth refine;He! he is gone, whose social veinSurpass'd the pow'r of wine.Fast by the streams he deign'd to praise,In yon' sequester'd grove,To him a votive urn I raise,To him and friendly Love.Yes, there, my Friend! forlorn and sad,I grave your Thomson's name,And there his lyre, which Fate forbadeTo sound your growing fame.There shall my plaintive song recountDark themes of hopeless woe,And faster than the dropping fountI'll teach mine eyes to flow.There leaves, in spite of Autumn green,Shall shade the hallow'd ground,And Spring will there again be seen,To call forth flow'rs around.But no kind suns will bid me share,Once more, his social hour;Ah, Spring! thou never canst repairThis loss to Damon's bow'r.AN IRREGULAR ODE, After sickness, 1749.—Melius, cum venerit ipsa, canemus.IMITATION.His wish'd-for presence will improve the song.TOO long a stranger to repose,At length from Pain's abhorred couch I rose,And wander'd forth alone,To court once more the balmy breeze,And catch the verdure of the trees,Ere yet their charms were flown.'Twas from a bank with pansies gayI hail'd once more the cheerful day,The sun's forgotten beams:O Sun! how pleasing were thy rays,Reflected from the polish'd faceOf yon' refulgent streams!Rais'd by the scene, my feeble tongueEssay'd again the sweets of song,And thus in feeble strains, and slow,The loit'ring numbers 'gan to flow.
" Come, gentle Air! my languid limbs restore," And bid me welcome from the Stygian shore," For sure I heard the tender sighs," I seem'd to join the plaintive cries" Of hapless youths, who thro' the myrtle grove" Bewail for ever their unfinish'd love;" To that unjoyous clime," Torn from the sight of these ethereal skies," Debarr'd the lustre of their Delia's eyes," And banish'd in their prime." Come, gentle Air! and, while the thickets bloom," Convey the jasmine's breath divine," Convey the woodbine's rich perfume," Nor spare the sweet-leaf'd eglantine;" And may'st thou shun the rugged storm" Till Health her wonted charms explain," With Rural Pleasure in her train," To greet me in her fairest form;" While from this lofty mount I view" The sons of Earth, the vulgar crew," Anxious for futile gains, beneath me stray," And seek with erring step Contentment's obvious way." Come, gentle Air! and thou, celestial Muse!" Thy genial flame infuse," Enough to lend a pensive bosom aid," And gild Retirement's gloomy shade;
" Enough to rear such rustic lays" As foes may slight, but partial friends will praise."The gentle Air allow'd my claim,And, more to cheer my drooping frame,She mix'd the balm of op'ning flowers,Such as the bee, with chymic powers,From Hybla's fragrant hills inhales,Or scents Sabea's blooming vales:But, ah! the nymphs that heal the pensive mind,By prescripts more refin'd,Neglect their vot'ry's anxious moan:Oh! how should they relieve?—the Muses all were flown.By flow'ry plain or woodland shadesI fondly sought the charming maids;By woodland shades or flow'ry plainI sought them, faithless maids! in vain;When, lo! in happier hour,I leave behind my native mead,To range where Zeal and Friendship lead,To visit L****'s honour'd bower.Ah! foolish man! to seek the tuneful maidsOn other plains, or near less verdant shades!Scarce have my footsteps press'd the favour'd ground,When sounds ethereal strike my ear;At once celestial forms appear;My fugitives are found!
The Muses here attune their lyres,Ah! partial, with unwonted fires;Here, hand in hand, with careless mien,The sportive Graces trip the green.But whilst I wander'd o'er a scene so fair,Too well at one survey I traceHow ev'ry Muse and ev'ry GraceHad long employ'd their care.Lurks not a stone enrich'd with lively stain,Blooms not a flower amid the vernal store,Falls not a plume on India's distant plain,Glows not a shell on Adria's rocky shore,But torn, methought, from native lands or seas,From their arrangement gain fresh pow'r to please.And some had bent the wild'ring maze,Bedeck'd with ev'ry shrub that blows,And some entwin'd the willing sprays,To shield th' illustrious dame's repose;Others had grac'd the sprightly dome,And taught the portrait where to glow;Others arrang'd the curious tome,Or 'mid the decorated spaceAssign'd the laurell'd bust a place,And given to learning all the pomp of show;And now from ev'ry task withdrawn,They met and frisk'd it o'er the lawn.Ah! woe is me, said I,And ***'s hilly circuit heard my cry:Have I for this with labour strove,And lavish'd all my little storeTo fence for you my shady grove,And scollop ev'ry winding shore,And fringe with ev'ry purple roseThe sapphire stream that down my valley flows?Ah! lovely treach'rous maids!To quit unseen my votive shades,When pale Disease and tort'ring PainHad torn me from the breezy plain,And to a restless couch confin'd,Who ne'er your wonted tasks declin'd.She needs not your officious aidTo swell the song or plan the shade;By genuine Fancy fir'd,Her native genius guides her hand,And while she marks the sage command,More lovely scenes her skill shall raise,Her lyre resound with nobler raysThan ever you inspir'd.Thus I my rage and grief display,But vainly blame, and vainly mourn,Nor will a Grace or Muse returnTill Luxborough lead the way.RURAL ELEGANCE, AN ODE TO THE LATE DUCHESS OF SOMERSET. Written 1750.WHILE orient skies restore the day,And dew-drops catch the lucid ray,Amid the sprightly scenes of mornWill aught the Muse inspire?Oh! peace to yonder clam'rous hornThat drowns the sacred lyre!Ye rural Thanes! that o'er the mossy downSome panting tim'rous hare pursue,Does Nature mean your joys alone to crown?Say, does she smooth her lawns for you?For you does Echo bid the rocks reply,And, urg'd by rude constraint, resound the jovial cry?See from the neighb'ring hill, forlorn,The wretched swain your sport survey;He finds his faithful fences torn,He finds his labour'd crops a prey;He sees his flock—no more in circles feed,Haply beneath your ravage bleed,And with no random curses lwads the deed.Nor yet, ye Swains! concludeThat Nature smiles for you alone;Your bounded souls and your conceptions crude,The proud, the selfish, boast disown:Yours be the produce of the soil;O may it still reward your toil!Nor ever the defenceless trainOf clinging infants ask support in vain!But tho' the various harvest gild your plains,Does the mere landscape feast your eye?Or the warm hope of distant gainsFar other cause of glee supply?Is not the red-streak's future juiceThe source of your delight profound,Where Ariconium pours her gems profuse,Purpling a whole horizon round?Athirst ye praise the limpid stream, 'tis true;But tho' the pebbled shores amongIt mimic no unpleasing song,The limpid fountain murmurs not for you.Unpleas'd ye see the thickets bloom,Unpleas'd the Spring her flow'ry robe resume;Unmov'd the mountain's airy pile,The dappled mead without a smile.O let a rural conscious Muse,For well she knows, your froward sense accuse:
Forth to the solemn oak you bring the square,And span the massy trunk before you cry 'Tis fair.Nor yet, ye Learn'd! nor yet, ye Courtly Train!If haply from your haunts ye strayTo waste with us a summer's day,Exclude the taste of ev'ry swain,Nor our untutor'd sense disdain:'Tis Nature only gives exclusive rightTo relish her supreme delight;She, where she pleases kind or coy,Who furnishes the scene, and forms us to enjoy.Then hither bring the fair ingenuous mind,By her auspicious aid refin'd.Lo! not an hedge-row hawthorn blows,Or humble harebell paints the plain,Or valley winds, or fountain flows,Or purple heath is ting'd in vain:For such the rivers dash the foaming tides,The mountain swells, the dale subsides;Ev'n thriftless furze detains their wand'ring sight,And the rough barren rock grows pregnant with delight.With what suspicious fearful careThe sordid wretch secures his claim,If haply some luxurious heirShould alienate the fields that wear his name!
What scruples lest some future birthShould litigate a span of earth!Bonds, contracts, feoffments, names unmeet for prose,The tow'ring Muse endures not to disclose:Alas! her unrevers'd decree,More comprehensive and more free,Her lavish charter, taste, appropriates all we see.Let gondolas their painted flags unfold,And be the solemn day enroll'd,When, to confirm his lofty plea,In nuptial sort, with bridal gold,The grave Venetian weds the sea:Each laughing Muse derides the vow;Ev'n Adria scorns the mock embrace,To some lone hermit on the mountain's brow,Allotted, from his natal hour,With all her myrtle shores in dow'r.His breast, to admiration prone,Enjoys the smile upon her face,Enjoys triumphant ev'ry grace,And finds her more his own.Fatigu'd with Form's oppressive laws,When Somerset avoids the great,When, cloy'd with merited applause,She seeks the rural calm retreat,
Does she not praise each mossy cell,And feel the truth my numbers tell?When, deafen'd by the loud acclaimWhich genius grac'd with rank obtains,Could she not more delighted hearYon' throstle chant the rising year?Could she not spurn the wreaths of fame,To crop the primrose of the plains?Does she not sweets in each fair valley find,Lost to the sons of Pow'r, unknown to half mankind?Ah! can she covet there to seeThe splendid slaves, the reptile race,That oil the tongue and bow the knee,That slight her merit, but adore her place?Far happier, if aright I deem,When from gay throngs and gilded spires,To where the lonely halcyons play,Her philosophic step retires;While, studious of the moral theme,She to some smooth sequester'd streamLikens the swains' inglorious day,Pleas'd from the flow'ry margin to surveyHow cool, serene, and clear, the current glides away.O blind to truth, to virtue blind,Who slight the sweetly pensive mind!
On whose fair birth the Graces mild,And ev'ry Muse prophetic smil'd.Not that the poet's boasted fireShould Fame's wide-echoing trumpet swell,Or on the music of his lyreEach future age with rapture dwell;The vaunted sweets of praise remove,Yet shall such bosoms claim a partIn all that glads the human heart;Yet these the spirits form'd to judge and proveAll Nature's charms immense, and Heav'n's unbounded love.And, oh! the transport most ally'd to song,In some fair villa's peaceful bound,To catch soft hints from Nature's tongue,And bid Arcadia bloom around;Whether we fringe the sloping hill,Or smooth below the verdant mead,Whether we break the falling rill,Or thro' meand'ring mazes lead,Or in the horrid bramble's roomBid careless groups of roses bloom,Or let some shelter'd lake sereneReflect flow'rs, woods, and spires, and brighten all the scene.O sweet disposal of the rural hour!O beauties never known to cloy!
While Worth and Genius haunt the favour'd bow'r,And ev'ry gentle breast partakes the joy;While Charity at eve surveys the swain,Enabled by these toils to cheerA train of helpless infants dear,Speed whistling home across the plain;See vagrant Luxury, her handmaid grown,For half her graceless deeds atone,And hails the bounteous work, and ranks it with her own.Why brand these pleasures with the nameOf soft unsocial toils, of indolence and shame?Search but the garden or the wood,Let yon' admir'd carnation ownNot all was meant for raiment or for food,Not all for needful use alone;There, while the seeds of future blossoms dwell,'Tis colour'd for the sight, perfum'd to please the smell.Why knows the nightingale to sing?Why flows the pine's nectareous juice?Why shines with paint the linnet's wing?For sustenance alone? for use?For preservation? Ev'ry sphereShall bid fair Pleasure's rightful claim appear;And sure there seem, of human kind,Some born to shun the solemn strife;
Some for amusive tasks design'd,To sooth the certain ills of life;Grace its lone vales with many a budding rose,New founts of bliss disclose,Call forth refreshing shades, and decorate repose.From plains and woodlands, from the viewOf rural Nature's blooming face,Smit with the glare of rank and place,To courts the sons of Fancy flew;There long had Art ordain'd a rival seat,There had she lavish'd all her careTo form a scene more dazzling fair,And call'd them from their green retreatTo share her proud control;Had given the robe with grace to flow,Had taught exotic gems to glow;And, emulous of Nature's pow'r,Mimic'd the plume, the leaf, the flow'r;Chang'd the complexion's native hue,Moulded each rustic limb anew,And warp'd the very soul.A while her magic strikes the novel eye,A while the fairy forms delight;And now aloof we seem to flyOn purple pinions thro' a purer sky,Where all is wondrous, all is bright:
Now, landed on some spangled shore,A while each dazzled maniac roves,By sapphire lakes thro' em'rald groves:Paternal acres please no more;Adieu the simple, the sincere delight—Th' habitual scene of hill and dale,The rural herds, the vernal gale,The tangled vetch's purple bloom,The fragrance of the bean's perfume,Be theirs alone who cultivate the soil,And drink the cup of thirst, and eat the bread of toil.But soon the pageant fades away!'Tis Nature only bears perpetual sway.We pierce the counterfeit delight,Fatigu'd with splendour's irksome beams;Fancy again demands the sightOf native groves and wonted streams,Pants for the scenes that charm'd her youthful eyes,Where Truth maintains her court, and banishes Disguise.Then hither oft', ye Senators! retire;With Nature here high converse hold;For who like Stamford her delights admire,Like Stamford shall with scorn beholdTh' unequal bribes of pageantry and gold;Beneath the British oak's majestic shadeShall see fair Truth, immortal maid!Friendship in artless guise array'd,
Honour and moral beauty shineWith more attractive charms, with radiance more divine.Yes, here alone did highest Heav'n ordainThe lasting magazine of charms,Whatever wins, whatever warms,Whatever fancy seeks to share,The great, the various, and the fair,For ever should remain!Her impulse nothing may restrain—Or whence the joy 'mid columns, tow'rs,'Midst all the city's artful trim,To rear some breathless vapid flow'rs,Or shrubs fuliginously grim?From rooms of silken foliage vain,To trace the dun far distant grove,Where, smit with undissembled pain,The woodlark mourns her absent love,Borne to the dusty town from native air,To mimic rural life, and sooth some vapour'd fair?But how must faithless Art prevail,Should all who taste our joy sincere,To virtue, truth, or science, dear,Forego a court's alluring pale,For dimpled brook and leafy grove,For that rich luxury of thought they love!Ah, no! from these the public sphere requiresExample for its giddy bands;From these impartial Heav'n demandsTo spread the flame itself inspires;To sift Opinion's mingled mass,Impress a nation's taste, and bid the sterling pass.Happy, thrice happy they,Whose graceful deeds have exemplary shoneRound the gay precincts of a throneWith mild effective beams!Who bands of fair ideas bring,By solemn grot or shady spring,To join their pleasing dreams!Theirs is the rural bliss without alloy;They only that deserve enjoy.What tho' nor fabled Dryad haunt their grove,Nor Naiad near their fountains rove?Yet all embody'd to the mental sight,A train of smiling Virtues brightShall there the wise retreat allow,Shall twine triumphant palms to deck the wand'rer's brow.And tho' by faithless friends alarm'd,Art have with Nature wag'd presumptuous war,By Seymour's winning influence charm'd,In whom their gifts united shine,No longer shall their councils jar.
'Tis her's to mediate the peace;Near Percy-lodge, with awe-struck mien,The rebel seeks her lawful queen,And havoc and contention cease.I see the rival pow'rs combine,And aid each other's fair design;Nature exalt the mound where Art shall build,Art shape the gay alcove, while Nature paints the field.Begin, ye Songsters of the grove!O warble forth your noblest lay;Where Somerset vouchsafes to rove,Ye Lev'rets! freely sport and play.—Peace to the strepent horn!Let no harsh dissonance disturb the Morn;No sounds inelegant and rudeHer sacred solitudes profane,Unless her candour not excludeThe lowly shepherd's votive strain,Who tunes his reed amidst his rural cheer,Fearful, yet not averse, that Somerset should hear.ODE TO INDOLENCE, 1750.AH! why for ever on the wingPersists my weary'd soul to roam?Why, ever cheated, strives to bringOr pleasure or contentment home?Thus the poor bird that draws his nameFrom Paradise's honour'd groves,Careless fatigues his little frame,Nor finds the resting place he loves.Lo! on the rural mossy bedMy limbs with careless ease reclin'd;Ah, gentle Sloth! indulgent spreadThe same soft bandage o'er my mind.For why should ling'ring thought invade,Yet ev'ry worldly prospect cloy?Lend me, soft Sloth! thy friendly aid,And give me peace, debarr'd of joy.Lov'st thou yon' calm and silent flood,That never ebbs, that never flows,Protected by the circling woodFrom each tempestuous wind that blows?An altar on its bank shall rise,Where oft' thy vot'ry shall be sound,What time pale Autumn lulls the skies,And sick'ning verdure fades around.Ye busy Race! ye factious Train!That haunt Ambition's guilty shrine,No more perplex the world in vain,But offer here your vows with mine.And thou, puissant Queen! be kind:If e'er I shar'd thy balmy pow'r,If e'er I sway'd my active mindTo weave for thee the rural bow'r;Dissolve in sleep each anxious care,Each unavailing sigh remove,And only let me wake to shareThe sweets of friendship and of love.ODE TO A YOUNG LADY, Somewhat too solicitous about her manner of expression.SURVEY, my Fair! that lucid streamAdown the smiling valley stray;Would Art attempt, or Fancy dream,To regulate its winding way?So pleas'd I view thy shining hairIn loose dishevell'd ringlets flow;Not all thy art, not all thy care,Can there one single grace bestow.Survey again that verdant hill,With native plants enamell'd o'er;Say, can the painter's utmost skillInstruct one flow'r to please us more?As vain it were, with artful dye,To change the bloom thy cheeks disclose;And, oh! may Laura, ere she try,With fresh vermilion paint the rose.Hark how the woodlark's tuneful throatCan every study'd grace excel;Let Art constrain the rambling note,And will she, Laura, please so well?Oh! ever keep thy native ease,By no pedantic law confin'd;For Laura's voice is form'd to please,So Laura's words be not unkind.WRITTEN IN A FLOWER BOOK Of my own colouring, designed for Lady Plymouth, 1753-4.Debitae nymphis opifex coronae.HOR.IMITATION.Constructor of the tributary wreathFor rural maids.BRING, Flora, bring thy treasures here,The pride of all the blooming year,And let me thence a garland frameTo crown this fair, this peerless, dame!But, ah! since envious Winter lours,And Hewell meads resign their flow'rs,Let Art and Friendship's joint essayDiffuse their flow'rets in her way.Not Nature can, herself, prepareA worthy wreath for Lesbia's hair,Whose temper, like her forehead, smooth,Whose thoughts and accents form'd to sooth,Whose pleasing mien, and make refin'd,Whose artless breast, and polish'd mind,From all the nymphs of plain or groveDeserv'd and won my Plymouth's love!THE DYING KID.Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aeviPrima fugit—VIRG.IMITATION.Ah! wretched mortals we!—our brightest daysOn fleetest pinion fly.A TEAR bedews my Delia's eye,To think yon' playful Kid must die;From crystal spring and flow'ry meadMust in his prime of life recede!Erewhile, in sportive circles roundShe saw him wheel, and frisk, and bound;From rock to rock pursue his way,And on the fearful margin play.Pleas'd on his various freaks to dwell,She saw him climb my rustic cell,Thence eye my lawns with verdure bright,And seem all ravish'd at the sight.She tells with what delight he stoodTo trace his features in the flood,Then skipp'd aloof with quaint amaze,And then drew near again to gaze.She tells me how with eager speedHe flew to hear my vocal reed;And how, with critic face profound,And stedfast ear, devour'd the found.His ev'ry frolic, light as air,Deserves the gentle Delia's care,And tears bedew her tender eye,To think the playful Kid must die.—But knows my Delia, timely wise,How soon this blameless era flies?While violence and craft succeed,Unfair design, and ruthless deed!Soon would the vine his wounds deplore,And yield her purple gifts no more;Ah! soon eras'd from ev'ry groveWere Delia's name and Strephon's love.No more those bow'rs might Strephon see,Where first he fondly gaz'd on thee;No more those beds of flow'rets find,Which for thy charming brows he twin'd.Each wayward passion soon would tearHis bosom, now so void of care,And when they left his ebbing vein,What but insipid age remain?Then mourn not the decrees of Fate,That gave his life so short a date,And I will join my tend'rest sighsTo think that youth so swiftly flies!ODE.SO dear my Lucio is to me,So well our minds and tempers blend,That seasons may for ever flee,And ne'er divide me from my friend;But let the favour'd boy forbearTo tempt with love my only fair.O Lycon! born when ev'ry Muse,When ev'ry Grace, benignant smil'd,With all a parent's breast could chuseTo bless her lov'd, her only child;'Tis thine, so richly grac'd, to proveMore noble cares than cares of love.Together we from early youthHave trod the flow'ry tracks of time,Together mus'd in search of truth,O'er learned sage or bard sublime;And well thy cultur'd breast I know,What wondrous treasure it can show.Come, then, resume thy charming lyre,And sing some patriot's worth sublime,Whilst I in fields of soft desireConsume my fair and fruitless prime;Whose reed aspires but to displayThe flame that burns me night and day.O come! the Dryads of the woodsShall daily sooth thy studious mind,The blue-ey'd nymphs of yonder floodsShall meet and court thee to be kind;And Fame sits list'ning for thy laysTo swell her trump with Lucio's praise.Like me, the plover fondly triesTo lure the sportsman from her nest,And flutt'ring on with anxious cries,Too plainly shews her tortur'd breast;O let him, conscious of her care,Pity her pains, and learn to spare.ODE. To be performed by Dr. Brettle, and a chorus of Hales Owen citizens. The instrumental part a Viol d'Amour.AIR BY THE DOCTOR.AWAKE! I say, awake, good people!And be for once alive and gay;Come, let's be merry; stir the tipple;How can you sleepWhilst I do play? How can you sleep, &c.CHORUS OF CITIZENS.Pardon, O! pardon, great Musician!On drowsy souls some pity take,For wondrous hard is our condition,To drink thy beer,Thy strains to hear;To drink,To hear,And keep awake!SOLO BY THE DOCTOR.Hear but this strain—'twas made by Handel,A wight of skill and judgment deep!Zoonters, they're gone—Sal, bring a candle—No, here is one, and he's asleep.DUETTE.DR.—How could they go [Soft music.Whilst I do play?SAL.—How could they go! [Warlike music.How should they stay?SONGS AND BALLADS.THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH, A Ballad, alluding to a story recorded of her when she was prisoner at Woodstock, 1554.WILL you hear how once repiningGreat Eliza captive lay,Each ambitious thought resigning,Foe to riches, pomp, and sway?While the nymphs and swains delightedTripp'd around in all their pride,Envying joys by others slighted,Thus the royal maiden cry'd." Bred on plains, or born in vallies," Who would bid those scenes adieu?" Stranger to the arts of malice," Who would ever courts pursue?" Malice never taught to treasure," Censure never taught to bear;" Love is all the shepherd's pleasure;" Love is all the damsel's care." How can they of humble station" Vainly blame the powers above?" Or accuse the dispensation" Which allows them all to love?" Love, like air, is widely giv'n;" Pow'r nor Chance can these restrain;" Truest, noblest, gifts of Heav'n!" Only purest on the plain!" Peers can no such charms discover," All in stars and garters drest," As on Sundays does the lover" With his nosegay on his breast." Pinks and roses in profusion," Said to fade when Chloe's near;" Fops may use the same allusion," But the shepherd is sincere." Hark to yonder milkmaid singing" Cheerly o'er the brimming pail," Cowslips all around her springing" Sweetly paint the golden vale." Never yet did courtly maiden" Move so sprightly, look so fair;" Never breast with jewels laden" Pour a song so void of care." Would indulgent Heav'n had granted" Me some rural damsel's part!" All the empire I had wanted" Then had been my shepherd's heart." Then with him o'er hills and mountains," Free from fetters, might I rove," Fearless taste the crystal fountains," Peaceful sleep beneath the grove." Rustics had been more forgiving," Partial to my virgin bloom;" None had envy'd me when living," None had triumph'd o'er my tomb."NANCY OF THE VALE. A BALLAD.Nerine Galatea! thymo mihi dulcior Hyblae!Candidior cygnis! hedera formosior alba!IMITATION.O Galatea! Nereus' blooming child,More sweet than thyme by HyblaHybla—a mountain in Sicily, famous for producing the finest honey. bees exhal'd,Fairer than swans, more beauteous to beholdThan ivy's purest white.THE western sky was purpled o'erWith ev'ry pleasing ray,And flocks reviving felt no moreThe sultry heats of day;When from an hazel's artless bowerSoft warbled Strephon's tongue;He bless'd the scene, he bless'd the hour,While Nancy's praise he sung." Let fops with fickle falsehood range" The paths of wanton love," While weeping maids lament their change," And sadden ev'ry grove:" But endless blessings crown the day" I saw fair Esham's dale!" And ev'ry blessing find its way" To Nancy of the Vale." 'Twas from Avona's banks the maid" Diffus'd her lovely beams," And ev'ry shining glance display'd" The Naiad of the streams." Soft as the wild-duck's tender young," That flote on Avon's tide," Bright as the water-lily, sprung," And glitt'ring near its side:" Fresh as the bord'ring flowers her bloom," Her eye all mild to view;" The little halcyon's azure plume" Was never half so blue." Her shape was like the reed so sleek," So taper, straight, and fair;" Her dimpled smile, her blushing cheek," How charming sweet they were!" Far in the winding Vale retir'd," This peerless bud I found," And shadowing rocks and woods conspir'd" To fence her beauties round." That Nature in so lone a dell" Should form a nymph so sweet!" Or Fortune to her secret cell" Conduct my wand'ring feet!" Gay lordlings sought her for their bride," But she would ne'er incline:"" Prove to your equals true," she cry'd," As I will prove to mine." 'Tis Strephon, on the mountain's brow," Has won my right good will;" To him I gave my plighted vow," With him I'll climb the hill."" Struck with her charms and gentle truth," I clasp'd the constant fair;" To her alone I gave my youth," And vow my future care." And when this vow shall faithless prove," Or I those charms forego," The stream that saw our tender love," That stream shall cease to flow.THE RAPE OF THE TRAP. A BALLAD, 1737.'TWAS in a land of learning,The Muses' fav'rite city,Such pranks of lateWere play'd by a rat,As—tempt one to be witty.All in a college study,Where books were in great plenty,This rat would devourMore sense in an hourThan I could write—in twenty.Corporeal food, 'tis granted,Serves vermine less refin'd, Sir;But this, a rat of taste,All other rats surpass'd,And he prey'd on the food of the mind, Sir.His breakfast half the morningHe constantly attended;And when the bell rungFor ev'ning songHis dinner scarce was ended!He spar'd not ev'n heroics,On which we poets pride us,And would make no moreOf King ArthursBy Blackmore. by the score,Than—all the world beside does.In books of geography,He made the maps to flutter;A river or a seaWas to him a dish of tea,And a kingdom bread and butter.But if some mawkish potionMight chance to overdose him,To check its rageHe took a pageOf logic—to compose him—A Trap, in haste and anger,Was bought, you need not doubt on't,And such was the gin,Were a lion once got in,He could not, I think, get out on't.With cheese, not books, 'twas bated;The fact—I'll not belie it—Since none—I tell you that—Whether scholar or rat,Minds books when he has other diet.But more of Trap and bait, Sir,Why should I sing, or either?Since the rat, who knew the sleight,Came in the dead of night,And dragg'd 'em away together.Both Trap and bait were vanish'dThro' a fracture in the flooring,Which tho' so trimIt now may seemHad then—a dozen or more in.Then answer this, ye Sages!Nor deem I mean to wrong ye,Had the rat, which thus did seize onThe Trap, less claim to reasonThan many a scull among ye?Dan Prior's Mice, I own it,Were vermine of condition;But this rat, who merely learn'dWhat rats alone concern'd,Was the greater politicianThat England's topsyturvyIs clear from these mishaps, Sir;Since Traps, we may determine,Will no longer take our vermine,But vermineWritten at the time of the Spanish depredations. take our Traps, Sir.Let sophs, by rats infested,Then trust in cats to catch 'em,Lest they grow as learn'd as weIn our studies, where, d'ye see,No mortal sits to watch 'em.Good luck betide our captains,Good luck betide our cats, Sir,And grant that the oneMay quell the Spanish Don,And the other destroy our rats, Sir.JEMMY DAWSON. A BALLAD. Written about the time of his execution, in the year 1745.COME listen to my mournful tale,Ye tender hearts and lovers dear!Nor will you scorn to heave a sigh,Nor need you blush to shed a tear.And thou, dear Kitty! peerless maid!Do thou, a pensive ear incline,For thou canst weep at ev'ry woe,And pity ev'ry plaint—but mine.Young Dawson was a gallant boy,A brighter never trod the plain,And well he lov'd one charming maid,And dearly was he lov'd again.One tender maid, she lov'd him dear;Of gentle blood the damsel came;And faultless was her beauteous form,And spotless was her virgin fame.But curse on party's hateful strife,That led the favour'd youth astray,The day the rebel clans appear'd;O had he never seen that day!Their colours and their sash he wore,And in the fatal dress was found;And now he must that death endureWhich gives the brave the keenest wound.How pale was then his true-love's cheek,When Jemmy's sentence reach'd her ear!For never yet did Alpine snowsSo pale, or yet so chill, appear.With falt'ring voice she, weeping, said," O Dawson! monarch of my heart!" Think not thy death shall end our loves," For thou and I will never part." Yet might sweet mercy find a place," And bring relief to Jemmy's woes," O George! without a pray'r for thee" My orisons should never close." The gracious prince that gave him life" Would crown a never-dying flame," And ev'ry tender babe I bore" Should learn to lisp the giver's name." But tho' he should be dragg'd in scorn" To yonder ignominious tree," He shall not want one constant friend" To share the cruel Fates' decree."O! then her mourning coach was call'd;The sledge mov'd slowly on before;Tho' borne in a triumphal car,She had not lov'd her fav'rite more.She follow'd him, prepar'd to viewThe terrible behests of law,And the last scene of Jemmy's woesWith calm and stedfast eye she saw.Distorted was that blooming faceWhich she had fondly lov'd so long,And stifled was that tuneful breathWhich in her praise had sweetly sung:And sever'd was that beauteous neckRound which her arms had fondly clos'd,And mangled was that beauteous breastOn which her love-sick head repos'd:And ravish'd was that constant heartShe did to ev'ry heart prefer,For tho' it could its king forget,'Twas true and loyal still to her.Amid those unrelenting flamesShe bore this constant heart to see,But when 'twas moulder'd into dust," Yet, yet," she cry'd, "I follow thee." My death, my death alone can shew" The pure, the lasting love I bore:" Accept, O Heav'n! of woes like ours," And let us, let us weep no more."The dismal scene was o'er and past,The lover's mournful herse retir'd;The maid drew back her languid head,And, sighing forth his name, expir'd.Tho' justice ever must prevail,The tear my Kitty sheds is due,For seldom shall she hear a taleSo sad, so tender, yet so true.A BALLAD.Trahit sua quemque voluptas. HOR.PROVERBIALIZ'D.Every one to his liking.FROM Lincoln to London rode forth our young squire,To bring down a wife whom the swains might admire;But in spite of whatever the mortal could say,The goddess objected the length of the way.To give up the op'ra, the Park, and the ball,For to view the stag's horns in an old country hall;To have neither China nor India to see,Nor a laceman to plague in a morning—not she!To forsake the dear playhouse, Quin, Garrick, and Clive,Who by dint of mere humour had kept her alive;To forego the full box for his lonesome abode,O Heav'ns! she should faint, she should die on the road!To forget the gay fashions and gestures of France,And to leave dear Auguste in the midst of the dance,And Harlequin too!—'twas in vain to require it,And she wonder'd how folks had the face to desireit.She might yield to resign the sweet singers of Ruckholt,Where the citizen matron seduces her cuckold;But Ranelagh soon would her footsteps recall,And the music, the lamps, and the glare, of Vauxhall.To be sure she could breathe no where else than in Town;Thus she talk'd like a wit, and he look'd like a clown;But the while honest Harry despair'd to succeed,A coach with a coronet trail'd her to Tweed.SONGThe following Songs were written chiefly between the year 1737 and 1742..I TOLD my nymph, I told her true,My fields were small, my flocks were few,While falt'ring accents spoke my fear,That Flavia might not prove sincere.Of crops destroy'd by vernal cold,And vagrant sheep that left my fold,Of these she heard, yet bore to hear;And is not Flavia then sincere?How, chang'd by Fortune's fickle wind,The friends I lov'd became unkind,She heard, and shed a gen'rous tear;And is not Flavia then sincere?How, if she deign'd my love to bless,My Flavia must not hope for dress;This, too, she heard, and smil'd to hear;And Flavia, sure, must be sincere.Go shear your flocks, ye jovial Swains!Go reap the plenty of your plains;Despoil'd of all which you revere,I know my Flavia's love sincere.SONG. THE LANDSCAPE.HOW pleas'd within my native bow'rsErewhile I pass'd the day!Was ever scene so deck'd with flow'rs?Were ever flow'rs so gay?How sweetly smil'd the hill, the vale,And all the Landscape round!The river gliding down the dale,The hill with beeches crown'd!But now, when urg'd by tender woes,I speed to meet my dear,That hill and stream my zeal oppose,And check my fond career.No more, since Daphne was my theme,Their wonted charms I see;That verdant hill and silver streamDivide my love and me.SONG.YE gentle Nymphs and gen'rous DamesThat rule o'er ev'ry British mind!Be sure ye sooth their am'rous flames,Be sure your laws are not unkind:For hard it is to wear their bloomIn unremitting sighs away,To mourn the night's oppressive gloom,And faintly bless the rising day.And cruel 'twere a free-born swain,A British youth, should vainly moan,Who, scornful of a tyrant's chain,Submits to your's, and your's alone.Nor pointed spear nor links of steelCould e'er those gallant minds subdue,Who Beauty's wounds with pleasure feel,And boast the fetters wrought by you.SONG. THE SKYLARK.GO, tuneful Bird! that gladd'st the skies,To Daphne's window speed thy way,And there on quiv'ring pinions rise,And there thy vocal art display.And if she deign thy notes to hear,And if she praise thy matin song,Tell her the sounds that sooth her earTo Damon's native plains belong.Tell her, in livelier plumes array'd,The bird from Indian groves may shine;But ask the lovely partial maidWhat are his notes compar'd to thine?Then bid her treat yon' witless beau,And all his flaunting race, with scorn,And lend an ear to Damon's woe,Who sings her praise, and sings forlorn.SONG.Ah! ego non aliter tristes evincere morbosOptarem, quam te sic quoque velle putem.IMITATION.Why should I wish to banish sore disease,Unless returning health my Delia please?ON ev'ry tree, in ev'ry plain,I trace the jovial spring in vain;A sickly languor veils mine eyes,And fast my waning vigour flies.Nor flow'ry plain nor budding tree,That smile on others, smile on me;Mine eyes from death shall court repose,Nor shed a tear before they close.What bliss to me can seasons bring?Or what the needless pride of spring?The cypress bough, that suits the bier,Retains its verdure all the year.'Tis true, my vine, so fresh and fair,Might claim a while my wonted care;My rural store some pleasure yield,So white a flock, so green a field!My friends, that each in kindness vie,Might well expect one parting sigh;Might well demand one tender tear;For when was Damon unsincere?But ere I ask once more to viewYon' setting sun his race renew,Inform me, Swains! my Friends! declare,Will pitying Delia join the prayer?SONG. The attribute of Venus.YES; Fulvia is like Venus fair,Has all her bloom, and shape, and air;But still, to perfect ev'ry grace,She wants—the smile upon her face.The crown majestic Juno wore,And Cynthia's brow the crescent bore,An helmet mark'd Minerva's mien,But smiles distinguish'd Beauty's queen.Her train was form'd of Smiles and Loves,Her chariot drawn by gentlest doves;And from her zone the nymph may find'Tis Beauty's province to be kind.Then smile, my Fair! and all whose aimAspires to paint the Cyprian dame,Or bid her breathe in living stone,Shall take their forms from you alone.SONG, 1742.WHEN bright Roxana treads the greenIn all the pride of dress and mien,Averse to freedom, love, and play,The dazzling rival of the day,None other beauty strikes mine eye,The lilies droop, the roses die.But when, disclaiming art, the fairAssumes a soft engaging air,Mild as the op'ning morn of May,Familiar, friendly, free, and gay,The scene improves where'er she goes,More sweetly smile the pink and rose.O lovely Maid! propitious hear,Nor deem thy shepherd insincere;Pity a wild illusive flame,That varies objects still the same,And let their very changes proveThe never-vary'd force of love.SONG. VALENTINE'S DAY, 1743.'TIS said that under distant skies,Nor you the fact deny,What first attracts an Indian's eyesBecomes his deity.Perhaps a lily or a rose,That shares the morning's ray,May to the waking swain discloseThe regent of the day.Perhaps a plant in yonder grove,Enrich'd with fragrant pow'r,May tempt his vagrant eyes to roveWhere blooms the sov'reign flow'r.Perch'd on the cedar's topmost bough,And gay with gilded wings,Perchance, the patron of his vow,Some artless linnet sings.The swain surveys her pleas'd, afraid,Then low to earth he bends,And owns upon her friendly aidHis health, his life, depends.Vain futile idols, bird, or flow'r,To tempt a vot'ry's pray'r!—How would his humble homage tow'rShould he behold my fair!Yes—might the Pagan's waking eyesO'er Flavia's beauty range,He there would fix his lasting choice,Nor dare, nor wish, to change.SONG, 1743.THE fatal hours are wondrous near,That from these fountains bear my dear;A little space is giv'n; in vain;She robs my sight, and shuns the plain.A little space, for me to proveMy boundless flame, my endless love;And, like the train of vulgar hours,Invidious Time that space devours.Near yonder beach is Delia's way,On that I gaze the livelong day;No eastern monarch's dazzling prideShould draw my longing eyes aside.The chief that knows of succours nigh,And sees his mangled legions die,Casts not a more impatient glance,To see the loit'ring aids advance.Not more the schoolboy, that expiresFar from his native home, requiresTo see some friend's familiar face,Or meet a parent's last embrace—She comes—but, ah! what crowds of beausIn radiant bands my fair enclose?Oh! better hadst thou shunn'd the green;Oh, Delia! better far unseen.Methinks, by all my tender fears,By all my sighs, by all my tears,I might from torture now be free—'Tis more than death to part from thee!SONG, 1744.THE lovely Delia smiles again!That killing frown has left her brow;Can she forgive my jealous pain,And give me back my angry vow?Love is an April's doubtful day;A while we see the tempest low'r,Anon the radiant heav'n survey,And quite forget the flitting show'r.The flow'rs, that hung their languid head,Are burnish'd by the transient rains;The vines their wonted tendrils spread,And double verdure gilds the plains.The sprightly birds, that droop'd no lessBeneath the pow'r of rain and wind,In ev'ry raptur'd note expressThe joy I feel—when thou art kind.SONG, 1744.PERHAPS it is not love, said I,That melts my soul when Flavia's nigh;Where wit and sense like her's agree,One may be pleas'd, and yet be free.The beauties of her polish'd mindIt needs no lover's eye to find;The hermit freezing in his cellMight wish the gentle Flavia well.It is not love—averse to bearThe servile chain that lovers wear;Let, let me all my fears remove,My doubts dispel—it is not love—Oh! when did wit so brightly shineIn any form less fair than thine?It is—it is love's subtle fire,And under friendship lurks desire.SONG, 1744.O'ER desert plains; and rushy meers,And wither'd heaths, I rove;Where tree, nor spire, nor cot, appears,I pass to meet my love.But tho' my path were damask'd o'erWith beauties e'er so fine,My busy thoughts would fly beforeTo fix alone—on thine.No fir-crown'd hills could give delight,No palace please mine eye;No pyramid's aërial height,Where mould'ring monarchs lie.Unmov'd, should Eastern kings advance,Could I the pageant see?Splendour might catch one scornful glance,Not steal one thought from thee.SONG. WINTER, 1746.No more, ye warbling Birds! rejoice:Of all that cheer'd the plain,Echo alone preserves her voice,And she—repeats my pain.Where'er my love-sick limbs I lay,To shun the rushing wind,Its busy murmur seems to say," She never will be kind!"The Naiads o'er their frozen urnsIn icy chains repine,And each in sullen silence mournsHer freedom lost, like mine!Soon will the sun's returning raysThe cheerless frost control;When will relenting Delia chaseThe winter of my soul?SONG. THE SCHOLAR'S RELAPSE.BY the side of a grove, at the foot of a hill,Where whisper'd the beech, and where murmur'd the rill,I vow'd to the Muses my time and my care,Since neither could win me the smiles of my fair.Free I rang'd like the birds, like the birds free I sung,And Delia's lov'd name scarce escap'd from my tongue;But if once a smooth accent delighted my ear,I should wish, unawares, that my Delia might hear.With fairest ideas my bosom I stor'd,Allusive to none but the nymph I ador'd;And the more I with study my fancy refin'd,The deeper impression she made on my mind.So long as of Nature the charms I pursue,I still must my Delia's dear image renew;The Graces have yielded with Delia to rove,And the Muses are all in alliance with Love.SONG. THE ROSE-BUD." SEE, Daphne! see," Florelio cry'd," And learn the sad effects of pride;" Yon' shelter'd Rose, how safe conceal'd!" How quickly blasted when reveal'd!" The sun with warm attractive rays" Tempts it to wanton in the blaze;" A gale succeeds from eastern skies," And all its blushing radiance dies." So you, my Fair! of charms divine," Will quit the plains, too fond to shine" Where Fame's transporting rays allure," Tho' here more happy, more secure." The breath of some neglected maid" Shall make you sigh you left the shade;" A breath to beauty's bloom unkind," As to the Rose an eastern wind."The nymph reply'd—"You first, my Swain!" Confine your sonnets to the plain;" One envious tongue alike disarms" You of your wit, me of my charms." What is, unknown, the poet's skill?" Or what, unheard, the tuneful thrill?" What, unadmir'd, a charming mien?" Or what the Rose's blush unseen?SONG. DAPHNE'S VISIT.YE Birds! for whom I rear'd the grove,With melting lay salute my love;My Daphne with your notes detain,Or I have rear'd my grove in vain.Ye Flow'rs! before her footsteps rise,Display at once your brightest dyes,That she your op'ning charms may see,Or what were all your charms to me?Kind Zephyr! brush each fragrant flow'r,And shed its odours round my bow'r;Or never more, O gentle Wind!Shall I from thee refreshment find.Ye Streams! if e'er your banks I lov'd,If e'er your native sounds improv'd,May each soft murmur sooth my fair,Or, oh! 'twill deepen my despair.And thou, my Grot! whose lonely boundsThe melancholy pine surrounds,May Daphne praise thy peaceful gloom,Or thou shalt prove her Damon's tomb.SONG. Written in a Collection of Bacchanalian Songs.ADIEU, ye jovial Youths! who joinTo plunge Old Care in floods of wine,And as your dazzled eyeballs roll,Discern him struggling in the bowl.Nor yet is hope so wholly flown,Nor yet is thought so tedious grown,But limpid stream and shady treeRetain, as yet, some sweets for me.And see, thro' yonder silent grove,See, yonder does my Daphne rove!With pride her footsteps I pursue,And bid your frantic joys adieu.The sole confusion I admire,Is that my Daphne's eyes inspire;I scorn the madness you approve,And value reason next to love.SONG. Imitated from the French.YES, these are the scenes where with Iris I stray'd,But short was her sway for so lovely a maid!
In the bloom of her youth to a cloister she run,In the bloom of her graces too fair for a nun!Ill-grounded, no doubt, a devotion must prove,So fatal to beauty, so killing to love!Yes, these are the meadows, the shrubs, and the plains,Once the scene of my pleasures, the scene of my pains;How many soft moments I spent in this grove!How fair was my nymph! and how fervent my love!Be still tho', my Heart! thine emotion give o'er;Remember the season of love is no more.With her how I stray'd amid fountains and bow'rs!Or loiter'd behind and collected the flow'rs!Then breathless with ardour my fair one pursu'd,And to think with what kindness my garland she view'd!But be still, my fond Heart! this emotion give o'er;Fain wouldst thou forget thou must love her no more.SONG.WHEN bright Ophelia treads the greenIn all the pride of dress and mien,Averse to freedom, mirth, and play,The lofty rival of the day,Methinks to my enchanted eyeThe lilies droop, the roses die.But when, disdaining art, the fairAssumes a soft engaging air,Mild as the opening morn of May,And as the feather'd warblers gay,The scene improves where'er she goes,More sweetly smiles the pink and rose." O lovely maid! propitious hear," Nor think thy Damon insincere." Pity my wild delusive flame;" For tho' the flow'rs are still the same," To me they languish or improve," And plainly tell me that I love."SONG.WHEN first, Philander, first I cameWhere Avon rolls his winding stream,The nymphs—how brisk! the swains—how gay!To see Asteria, queen of May!—The parsons round her praises sung!The steeples with her praises rung!—I thought—no sight that e'er was seenCould match the fight of Barel's Green.But now, since old Eugenio dy'd—The chief of poets, and the pride—
Now, meaner bards in vain aspireTo raise their voice, to tune their lyre;Their lovely season now is o'er;Thy notes, Florelio, please no more—No more Asteria's smiles are seen—Adieu—the sweets of Barel's Green!—THE HALCYON.WHY o'er the verdant banks of oozeDoes yonder Halcyon speed so fast?'Tis all because she would not loseHer fav'rite calm, that will not last.The sun with azure paints the skies,The stream reflects each flow'ry spray,And, frugal of her time, she fliesTo take her fill of love and play.See her, when rugged Boreas blows,Warm in some rocky cell remain;To seek for pleasure, well she knows,Would only then enhance the pain." Descend," she cries, "thou hated show'r," Deform my limpid waves to-day," For I have chose a fairer hour" To take my fill of love and play?"You, too, my Silvia, sure will ownLife's azure seasons swiftly roll,And when our youth or health is flown,To think of love but shocks the soul.Could Damon but deserve thy charms,As thou art Damon's only theme,He'd fly as quick to Delia's armsAs yonder Halcyon skims the stream.MORAL PIECES.THE JUDGMENT OF HERCULES.WHILE blooming Spring descends from genial skies,By whose mild influence instant wonders rise,From whose soft breath Elysian beauties flow,The sweets of Hagley, or the pride of Stowe,Will Lyttleton the rural landscape range,Leave noisy fame, and not regret the change?Pleas'd will he tread the garden's early scenes,And learn a moral from the rising greens?There, warm'd alike by Sol's enliv'ning pow'r,The weed, aspiring, emulates the flow'r;The drooping flow'r, its fairer charms display'd,Invites from grateful hands their gen'rous aid:Soon, if none check th' invasive foe's designs,The lively lustre of these scenes declines!'Tis thus the spring of youth, the morn of life,Rears in our minds the rival seeds of strife:Then passion riots, reason then contends,And on the conquest ev'ry bliss depends:Life from the nice decision takes its hue,And bless'd those judges who decide like you!On worth like theirs shall ev'ry bliss attend,The world their fav'rite, and the world their friend.There are who, blind to Thought's fatiguing ray,As Fortune gives examples urge their way;
Not Virtue's foes, tho' they her paths decline,And scarce her friends, tho' with her friends they join;In her's or Vice's casual road advance,Thoughtless, the sinners or the saints of Chance!Yet some more nobly scorn the vulgar voice,With judgment fix, with zeal pursue their choice,When ripen'd thought, when reason born to reign,Checks the wild tumults of the youthful vein;While passion's lawless tides, at their command,Glide thro' more useful tracts, and bless the land.Happiest of these is he whose matchless mind,By learning strengthen'd and by taste refin'd,In Virtue's cause essay'd its earliest pow'rs,Chose Virtue's paths, and strewed her paths with flow'rs.The first alarm'd, if Freedom waves her wings,The fittest to adorn each art she brings;Lov'd by that prince whom ev'ry virtue fires,Prais'd by that bard whom ev'ry Muse inspires;Bless'd in the tuneful art, the social flame;In all that wins, in all that merits, fame!'Twas youth's perplexing stage his doubts inspir'd,When great Alcides to a grove retir'd:Thro' the lone windings of a devious glade,Resign'd to thought, with ling'ring steps he stray'd,Blest with a mind to taste sincerer joys,Arm'd with a heart each false one to despise.Dubious he stray'd, with wav'ring thoughts possest,Alternate passions struggling shar'd his breast;
The various arts which human cares divide,In deep attention all his mind employ'd;Anxious, if Fame an equal bliss secur'd,Or silent Ease with softer charms allur'd.The sylvan choir, whose numbers sweetly flow'd,The fount that murmur'd, and the flow'rs that blow'd;The silver flood that in meanders ledHis glitt'ring streams along th' enliven'd mead;The soothing breeze, and all those beauties join'd,Which, whilst they please, effeminate the mind;In vain! while distant, on a summit rais'd,Th' imperial tow'rs of Fame attractive blaz'd.While thus he trac'd thro' Fancy's puzzling mazeThe sep'rate sweets of pleasure and of praise,Sudden the wind a fragrant gale convey'd,And a new lustre gain'd upon the shade:At once before his wond'ring eyes were seenTwo female forms, of more than mortal mien:Various their charms; and in their dress and faceEach seem'd to vie with some peculiar grace.This, whose attire less clogg'd with art appear'd,The simple sweets of innocence endear'd:Her sprightly bloom, her quick sagacious eye,Shew'd native merit mix'd with modesty:Her air diffus'd a mild yet awful ray,Severely sweet, and innocently gay.Such the chaste image of the martial maid,In artless folds of virgin white array'd.
She let no borrow'd rose her cheeks adorn,Her blushing cheeks, that sham'd the purple morn:Her charms nor had nor wanted artful foils,Or study'd gestures, or well-practis'd smiles:She scorn'd the toys which render beauty less;She prov'd th' engaging chastity of dress;And while she chose in native charms to shine,Ev'n thus she seem'd, nay, more than seem'd, divine.One modest em'rald clasp'd the robe she wore,And in her hand th' imperial sword she bore.Sublime her height, majestic was her pace,And match'd the awful honours of her face.The shrubs, the flow'rs, that deck'd the verdant ground,Seem'd, where she trod, with rising lustre crown'd.Still her approach with stronger influence warm'd;She pleas'd while distant, but when near she charm'd.So strikes the gazer's eye the silver gleamThat, glitt'ring, quivers o'er a distant stream;But from its banks we see new beauties rise,And in its crystal bosom trace the skies.With other charms the rival vision glow'd,And from her dress her tinsel beauties flow'd.A flutt'ring robe her pamper'd shape conceal'd,And seem'd to shade the charms it best reveal'd:Its form contriv'd her faulty size to grace,Its hue to give fresh lustre to her face.Her plaited hair, disguis'd, with brilliants glar'd;Her cheeks the ruby's neighb'ring lustre shar'd;
The gaudy topaz lent its gay supplies,And ev'ry gem that strikes less curious eyes;Expos'd her breast, with foreign sweets perfum'd,And round her brow a roseate garland bloom'd.Soft smiling, blushing, lips conceal'd her wiles,Yet, ah! the blushes artful as the smiles.Oft' gazing on her shade, th' enraptur'd fairDecreed the substance well deserv'd her care;Her thoughts, to others' charms malignly blind,Centred in that, and were to that confin'd;And if on others' eyes a glance were thrown,'Twas but to watch the influence of her own:Much like her guardian, fair Cythera's queen,When for her warrior she refines her mien;Or when, to bless her Delian fav'rite's arms,The radiant fair invigorates her charms:Much like her pupil, Egypt's sportive dame,Her dress expressive, and her air the same,When her gay bark o'er silver Cydnos roll'd,And all th' emblazon'd streamers wav'd in gold.Such shone the vision, nor forebore to moveThe fond contagious airs of lawless love;Each wanton eye deluding glances fir'd,And am'rous dimples on each cheek conspir'd.Lifeless her gait, and slow; with seeming pain,She dragg'd her loit'ring limbs along the plain,Yet made some faint efforts, and first approach'd the swain.
So glaring draughts, with tawdry lustre bright,Spring to the view, and rush upon the sight;More slowly charms a Raphael's chaster air,Waits the calm search, and pays the searcher's care.Wrapp'd in a pleas'd suspense, the youth survey'dThe various charms of each attractive maid:Alternate each he view'd, and each admir'd,And found, alternate, varying flames inspir'd:Quick o'er their forms his eyes with pleasure ran,When she, who first approach'd him, first began." Hither, dear Boy! direct thy wand'ring eyes;" 'Tis here the lovely Vale of Pleasure lies:" Debate no more, to me thy life resign;" Each sweet which Nature can diffuse is mine:" For me the nymph diversifies her pow'r," Springs in a tree, or blossoms in a flow'r;" To please my ear she tunes the linnet's strains;" To please my eye with lilies paints the plains;" To form my couch in mossy beds she grows;" To gratify my smell perfumes the rose;" Reveals the fair, the fertile, scene you see," And swells the vegetable world for me." Let the gull'd fool the toils of war pursue," Where bleed the many to enrich the few;" Where Chance from Courage claims the boasted prize;" Where, tho' she give, your country oft' denies." Industrious thou shalt Cupid's wars maintain," And ever gently fight his soft campaign;
" His darts alone shalt wield, his wounds endure," Yet only suffer to enjoy the cure." Yield but to me—a choir of nymphs shall rise" And fire thy breast, and bless thy ravish'd eyes:" Their beauteous cheeks a fairer rose shall wear," A brighter lily on their necks appear;" Where fondly thou thy favour'd head shalt rest," Soft as the down that swells the eygnet's nest;" While Philomel in each soft voice complains," And gently lulls thee with mellifluous strains;" Whilst with each accent sweetest odours flow," And spicy gums round ev'ry bosom glow." Not the fam'd bird Arabian climes admire" Shall in such luxury of sweets expire." At Sloth let War's victorious sons exclaim," In vain! for Pleasure is my real name:" Nor envy thou the head with bays o'ergrown;" No, seek thou roses to adorn thy own;" For well each op'ning scene that claims my care" Suits and deserves the beauteous crown I wear." Let others prune the vine; the genial bowl" Shall crown thy table and enlarge thy soul." Let vulgar hands explore the brilliant mine," So the gay produce glitter still on thine." Indulgent Bacchus loads his lab'ring tree," And, guarding, gives its clust'ring sweets to me." For my lov'd train Apollo's piercing beam" Darts thro' the passive glebe, and frames the gem.
" See in my cause consenting gods employ'd," Nor slight these gods, their blessings unenjoy'd." For thee the poplar shall its amber drain;" For thee, in clouded beauty, spring the cane;" Some costly tribute ev'ry clime shall pay," Some charming treasure ev'ry wind convey;" Each object round some pleasing scene shall vield," Art build thy dome, while Nature decks thy field:" Of Corinth's Order shall the structure rise," The spiring turrets glitter thro' the skies;" Thy costly robe shall glow with Tyrian rays," Thy vase shall sparkle, and thy car shall blaze;" Yet thou, whatever pomp the sun display," Shalt own the am'rous night exceeds the day." When melting flutes and sweetly-sounding lyres" Wake the gay Loves, and cite the young Desires;" Or in th' Ionian dance some fav'rite maid" Improves the flame her sparkling eyes convey'd;" Think, can'st thou quit a glowing Delia's arms," To feed on Virtue's visionary charms?" Or slight the joys which wit and youth engage," For the faint honour of a frozen sage?" To find dull envy ev'n that hope deface," And, where you toil'd for glory, reap disgrace?" O! think that beauty waits on thy decree," And thy lov'd loveliest charmer pleads with me," She whose soft smile or gentler glance to move," You vow'd the wild extremities of love;
" In whose endearments years like moments flew;" For whose endearments millions seem'd too few;" She, she implores; she bids thee seize the prime" And tread with her the flow'ry tracts of time," Nor thus her lovely bloom of life bestow" On some cold lover or insulting foe." Think, if against that tongue thou canst rebel," Where love yet dwelt, and reason seem'd to dwell," What strong persuasion arms her softer sighs!" What full conviction sparkles in her eyes!" See Nature smiles, and birds salute the shade," Where breathing jasmine screens the sleeping maid," And such her charms, as to the vain may prove" Ambition seeks more humble joys than Love!" There busy toil shall ne'er invade thy reign," Nor sciences perplex thy lab'ring brain," Or none but what with equal sweets invite," Nor other arts but to prolong delight." Sometimes thy fancy prune her tender wing," To praise a pendant, or to grace a ring;" To fix the dress that suits each varying mien;" To shew where best the clust'ring gems are seen;" To sigh soft strains along the vocal grove," And tell the charms, the sweet effects, of love!" Nor fear to find a coy disdainful Muse," Nor think the Sisters will their aid refuse:" Cool grots, and tinkling rills, or silent shades," Soft scenes of leisure, suit th' harmonious maids;
" And all the wise and all the grave decree" Some of that sacred train ally'd to me." But if more specious ease thy wishes claim," And thy breast glow with faint desire of fame," Some softer science shall thy thoughts amuse," And learning's name a solemn sound diffuse." To thee all Nature's curious stores I'll bring," Explain the beauties of an insect's wing;" The plant which Nature less diffusely kind," Has to few climes with partial care confin'd;" The shell she scatters with more careless air," And in her frolics seems supremely fair;" The worth that dazzles in the tulip's stains," Or lurks beneath a pebble's various veins." Sleep's downy god averse to war's alarms," Shall o'er thy head diffuse his softest charms," Ere anxious thought thy dear repose assail," Or care, my most destructive foe, prevail." The wat'ry nymphs shall tune the vocal vales," And gentle zephyrs harmonize their gales," For thy repose inform, with rival joy," Their streams to murmur, and their winds to sigh." Thus shalt thou spend the sweetly-flowing day," Till, lost in bliss, thou breathe thy soul away;" Till she t' Elysian bow'rs of joy repair," Nor find my charming scenes exceeded there."She ceas'd; and on a lily'd bank reclin'd,Her flowing robe wav'd wanton with the wind;
One tender hand her drooping head sustains,One points, expressive, to the flow'ry plains.Soon the fond youth perceiv'd her influence rollDeep in his breast, to melt his manly soul;As when Favonius joins the solar blaze,And each fair fabric of the frost decays.Soon to his breast the soft harangue convey'dResolves too partial to the specious maid.He sigh'd, he gaz'd, so sweetly smil'd the dame,Yet sighing, gazing, seem'd to scorn his flame,And oft' as Virtue caught his wand'ring eye,A crimson blush condemn'd the rising sigh.'Twas such the ling'ring Trojan's shame betray'd,When Maia's son the frown of Jove display'd;When wealth, fame, empire, could no balance proveFor the soft reign of Dido and of love.Thus ill with arduous glory love conspires,Soft tender flames with bold impetuous fires!Some hov'ring doubts his anxious bosom mov'd,And Virtue, zealous fair! those doubts improv'd." Fly, fly, fond Youth! the too indulgent maid," Nor err, by such fantastic scenes betray'd." Tho' in my path the rugged thorn be seen," And the dry turf disclose a fainter green;" Tho' no gay rose or flow'ry product shine," The barren surface still conceals the mine." Each thorn that threatens, ev'n the weed that grows" In Virtue's path, superior sweets bestows—
" Yet should those boasted specious toys allure," Whence could fond Sloth the flatt'ring gifts procure?" The various wealth that tempts thy fond desire," 'Tis I alone, her greatest foe, acquire." I from old Ocean rob the treasur'd store;" I thro' each region latent gems explore:" 'Twas I the rugged brilliant first reveal'd," By num'rous strata deep in earth conceal'd;" 'Tis I the surface yet refine, and show" The modest gem's intrinsic charms to glow;" Nor swells the grape, nor spires its feeble tree," Without the firm supports of industry." But grant we Sloth the scene herself has drawn," The mossy grotto and the flow'ry lawn;" Let Philomela tune th' harmonious gale," And with each breeze eternal sweets exhale;" Let gay Pomona slight the plains around," And chuse, for fairest fruits, the favour'd ground;" To bless the fertile vale should Virtue cease," Nor mossy grots nor flow'ry lawns could please," Nor gay Pomona's luscious gifts avail," The sound harmonious, or the spicy gale." Seest thou yon' rocks in dreadful pomp arise," Whose rugged cliffs deform th' encircling skies?" Those fields, whence Phoebus all their moisture drains," And, too profusely fond, disrobes the plains?" When I vouchsafe to tread the barren soil," Those rocks seem lovely, and those deserts smile;
" The form thou view'st to ev'ry scene with ease" Transfers its charms, and ev'ry scene can please." When I have on those pathless wilds appear'd," And the lone wand'rerwith my presence cheer'd," Those cliffs the exile has with pleasure view'd," And call'd that desert Blissful Solitude!" Nor I alone to such extend my care," Fair-blooming Health surveys her altars there;" Brown Exercise will lead thee where she reigns," And with reflected lustre gild the plains:" With her, in flow'r of youth and beauty's pride," Her offspring, calm Content and Peace, reside;" One ready off'ring suits each neighb'ring shrine," And all obey their laws who practise mine." But Health averse, from Sloth's smooth region flies," And in her absence Pleasure droops and dies;" Her bright companions, Mirth, Delight, Repose," Smile where she smiles, and sicken when she goes:" A galaxy of pow'rs! whose forms appear" For ever beauteous, and for ever near." Nor will soft Sleep to Sloth's request incline," He from her couches flies unbid to mine." Vain is the sparkling bowl, the warbling strain," Th' incentive song, the labour'd viand vain!" Where she, relentless, reigns without control," And checks each gay excursion of the soul;" Unmov'd tho' Beauty, deck'd in all its charms," Grace the rich couch, and spread the softest arms;
" Till joyless indolence suggests desires," Or drugs are sought to furnish languid fires;" Such languid fires as on the vitals prey," Barren of bliss, but fertile of decay:" As artful heats, apply'd to thirsty lands," Produce no flow'rs, and but debase the sands." But let fair Health her cheering smiles impart;" How sweet is Nature, how superfluous Art!" 'Tis she the fountain's ready draught commends," And smooths the flinty couch which Fortune lends;" And when my hero from his toils retires," Fills his gay bosom with unusual fires," And while no checks th' unbounded joy reprove," Aids and refines the genuine sweets of love." His fairest prospect rising trophies frame," His sweetest music is the voice of Fame;" Pleasures to Sloth unknown! she never found" How fair the prospect, or how sweet the sound." See Fame's gay structure from yon'summit charms," And fires the manly breast to arts or arms;" Nor dread the steep ascent by which you rise" From grov'lling vales to tow'rs which reach theskies." Love, fame, esteem, 'tis labour must acquire," The smiling offspring of a rigid sire!" To fix the friend your service must be shown;" All ere they lov'd your merit lov'd their own." That wond'ring Greece your portrait may admire," That tuneful bards may string for you their lyre,
" That books may praise, or coins record your name," Such, such rewards 'tis toil alone can claim!" And the same column which displays to view" The conqu'ror's name, displays the conquest too." 'Twas slow Experience, tedious mistress! taught" All that e'er nobly spoke or bravely fought:" 'Twas she the patriot, she the bard, refin'd" In arts that serve, protect, or please, mankind." Not the vain visions of inactive schools," Not Fancy's maxims, not Opinion's rules," E'er form'd the man whose gen'rous warmth extends" T' enrich his country or to serve his friends." On active worth the laurel War bestows;" Peace rears her olive for industrious brows;" Nor earth, uncultur'd, yields its kind supplies," Nor heav'n its show'rs, without a sacrifice." See, far below such grov'lling scenes of shame" As lull to rest Ignavia's slumb'ring dame;" Her friends, from all the toils of Fame secure," Alas! inglorious, greater toils endure;" Doom'd all to mourn who in her cause engage," A youth enervate, and a painful age;" A sickly sapless mass if Reason flies," And if she linger impotently wise!" A thoughtless train, who, pamper'd, sleek, and gay," Invite old age, and revel youth away;" From life's fresh vigour move the load of care," And idly place it where they least can bear:
" When to the mind, diseas'd, for aid they fly," What kind reflection shall the mind supply?" When with lost health, what should the loss allay," Peace, peace is lost, a comfortless decay!" But to my friends, when youth, when pleasure, flies," And earth's dim beauties fade before their eyes," Thro' death's dark vista flow'ry tracts are seen," Elysian plains, and groves for ever green:" If o'er their lives a refluent glance they cast," Their's is the present who can praise the past:" Life has its bliss for these when past its bloom," As wither'd roses yield a late perfume." Serene, and safe from passion's stormy rage," How calm they glide into the port of Age!" Of the rude voyage less depriv'd than eas'd;" More tir'd than pain'd, and weaken'd than diseas'd:" For health on age 'tis temp'rance must bestow," And peace from piety alone can flow;" And all the incense bounteous Jove requires" Has sweets for him who feeds the sacred fires." Sloth views the tow'rs of Fame with envious eyes," Desirous still, still impotent to rise." Oft', when resolv'd to gain those blissful tow'rs," The pensive queen the dir ascent explores," Comes onward, wafted by the balmy trees," Some sylvan music, or some scented breeze;" She turns her head, her own gay realm she spies," And all the short-liv'd resolution dies.
" Thus some sond insect's falt'ring pinions wave," Clasp'd in its fav'rite sweets, a lasting slave;" And thus in vain these charming visions please" The wretch of glory and the slave of ease," Doom'd ever in ignoble state to pine," Boast her own scenes, and languish after mine." But shun her snares; nor let the world exclaim" Thy birth, which was thy glory, prov'd thy shame." With early hope thine infant actions fir'd," Let manhood crown what infancy inspir'd;" Let gen'rous toils reward with health thy days," Prolong thy prime, and eternize thy praise." The bold exploit that charms th' attesting age," To latest times shall gen'rous hearts engage;" And with that myrtle shall thy shrine be crown'd," With which, alive, thy graceful brows were bound," Till Time shall bid thy virtues freely bloom," And raise a temple where it found a tomb." Then in their feasts thy name shall Grecians join," Shall pour the sparkling juice to Jove's and thine:" Thine, us'd in war, shall raise their native fire;" Thine, us'd in peace, their mutual faith inspire." Dulness, perhaps, thro' want of sight, may blame," And Spleen, with odious industry, defame;" And that the honours giv'n with wonder view," And this in secret sadness own them due." Contempt and Envy were by Fate design'd" The rival tyrants which divide mankind;
" Contempt, which none but who deserve can bear," While Envy's wounds the smiles of Fame repair:" For know, the gen'rous thine exploits shall fire," Thine ev'ry friend it suits thee to require;" Lov'd by the gods, and, till their seats I show," Lov'd by the good, their images below."" Cease, lovely Maid! fair daughter of the Skies!" My guide! my queen!" th' ecstatic youth replies:" In thee I trace a form design'd for sway," Which chiefs may court, and kings with pride obey;" And by thy bright immortal friends I swear," Thy fair idea shall no toils impair." Lead me, O lead me! where whole hosts of foes" Thy form depreciate, and thy friends oppose." Welcome all toils th' inequal Fates decree," While toils endear thy faithful charge to thee." Such be my cares, to bind th' oppressive hand," And crush the fetters of an injur'd land;" To see the monster's noxious life resign'd," And tyrants quell'd, the monsters of mankind!" Nature shall smile to view the vanquish'd brood," And none but Envy riot unsubdu'd." In cloister'd state let selfish sages dwell," Proud that their heart is narrow as their cell!" And boast their mazy labyrinth of rules," Far less the friends of Virtue than the fools;" Yet such in vain thy fav'ring smiles pretend," For he is thine who proves his country's friend.
" Thus when my life, well-spent, the good enjoy," And the mean envious labour to destroy;" When, strongly lur'd by Fame's contiguous shrine," I yet devote my choicer vows to thine;" If all my toils thy promis'd favour claim," O lead thy fav'rite thro' the gates of Fame!"He ceas'd his vows, and, with disdainful air,He turn'd to blast the late exulting fair:But vanish'd, fled to some more friendly shore,The conscious phantom's beauty pleas'd no more;Convinc'd her spurious charms of dress and faceClaim'd a quick conquest or a sure disgrace.Fantastic Pow'r! whose transient charms allur'd,While Error's mist the reas'ning mind obscur'd;Not such the vict'ress, Virtue's constant queen,Endur'd the test of truth, and dar'd be seen;Her bright'ning form and features seem'd to own'Twas all her wish, her int'rest, to be known;And when his longing view the fair declin'd,Left a full image of her charms behind.Thus reigns the moon, with furtive splendour crown'd,While glooms oppress us, and thick shades surround;But let the source of light its beams display,Languid and faint the mimic flames decay,And all the sick'ning splendour fades away.THE PROGRESS OF TASTE: OR, THE FATE OF DELICACY.A poem on the temper and studies of the Author; and how great a misfortune it is for a man of small estate to have much taste.PART THE FIRST.PERHAPS some cloud eclips'd the day,When thus I tun'd my pensive lay." The ship is launch'd—we catch the gale—" On life's extended ocean sail;" For happiness our course we bend," Our ardent cry, our general end!" Yet, ah! the scenes which tempt our care" Are, like the forms dispers'd in air," Still dancing near disorder'd eyes," And weakest his who best descries!"Yet let me not my birthright barter,(For wishing is the poet's charter;All bards have leave to wish what's wanted,Tho' few e'er found their wishes granted;Extensive field! where poets pride themIn singing all that is deny'd them.)For humble ease, ye Pow'rs! I pray;That plain warm suit for ev'ry day,And pleasure, and brocade, bestow,To flaunt it—once a month, or so.
The first for constant wear we want;The first, ye Pow'rs! for ever grant;But constant wear the last bespatters,And turns the tissue into tatters.Where'er my vagrant course I bend,Let me secure one faithful friend.Let me, in public scenes, requestA friend of wit and taste, well dress'd;And if I must not hope such favour,A friend of wit and taste, however.Alas! that Wisdom ever shunsTo congregate her scatter'd sons,Whose nervous forces, well combin'd,Would win the field, and sway mankind.The fool will squeeze, from morn to night,To fix his follies full in sight;The note he strikes, the plume he shows,Attract whole flights of fops and beaus,And kindred-fools, who ne'er had known him,Flock at the sight, caress, and own him;But ill-starr'd Sense, nor gay nor loud,Steals soft on tiptoe thro' the crowd;Conveys his meagre form between,And slides, like pervious air, unseen;Contracts his known tenuity,As tho' 'twere ev'n a crime to be;Nor ev'n permits his eyes to stray,And win acquaintance in their way.In company, so mean his air,You scarce are conscious he is there,Till from some nook, like sharpen'd steel,Occurs his face's thin profile,Still seeming from the gazer's eye,Like Venus, newly bath'd, to fly:Yet while reluctant he displaysHis real gems before the blaze,The fool hath, in its centre, plac'dHis tawdry stock of painted paste.Disus'd to speak, he tries his skill,Speaks coldly, and succeeds but ill,His pensive manner dulness deem'd,His modesty reserve esteem'd;His wit unknown, his learning vain,He wins not one of all the train:And those who, mutually known,In friendship's fairest list had shone,Less prone than pebbles to unite,Retire to shades from public sight,Grow savage, quit their social nature,And starve to study mutual satire.But friends and fav'rites, to chagrin them,Find counties, countries, seas, between them;Meet once a-year, then part, and thenRetiring, wish to meet again.Sick of the thought, let me provideSome human form to grace my side;
At hand, where'er I shape my course,An useful, pliant, stalking-horse.No gesture free from some grimace,No seam without its share of lace,But, mark'd with gold or silver either,Hint where his coat was piec'd together.His legs be lengthen'd, I advise,And stockings roll'd abridge his thighs.What tho' Vandyck had other rules?What had Vandyck to do with fools?Be nothing wanting but his mind;Before a solitire, behindA twisted ribbon, like the trackWhich Nature gives an ass's back.Silent as midnight! pity 'twere,His wisdom's slender wealth to share!And whilst in flocks our fancies stray,To wish the poor man's lamb away.This form attracting ev'ry eye,I stroll all unregarded by:This wards the jokes of ev'ry kind,As an umbrella sun or wind;Or, like a spunge, absorbs the salliesAnd pestilential fumes of malice;Or, like a splendid shield, is fitTo screen the Templar's random wit;Or, what some gentler cit lets fall,As woolpacks quash the leaden ball.Aliusions these of weaker force,And apter still the stalking-horse.O let me wander all unseenBeneath the sanction of his mien!As lilies soft, as roses fair!Empty as airpumps drain'd of air!With steady eye and pace remarkThe speckled flock that haunts the ParkSt. James's.;Level my pen with wondrous heedAt follies, flocking there to feed;And as my satire bursts amain,See feather'd fopp'ry strew the plain.But when I seek my rural grove,And share the peaceful haunts I love,Let none of this unhallow'd trainMy sweet sequester'd paths profane.Oft' may some polish'd virtuous friendTo these soft-winding vales descend,And love with me inglorious things,And scorn with me the pomp of kings;And check me when my bosom burnsFor statues, paintings, coins, and urns:For I in Damon's pray'r could join,And Damon's wish might now be mine—But all dispers'd! the wish, the pray'r,Are driv'n to mix with common air.PART THE SECOND.How happy once was Damon's lot,While yet romantic schemes were not,Ere yet he sent his weakly eyesTo plan frail castles in the skies!Forsaking pleasures cheap and common,To court a blaze, still flitting from one.Ah! happy Damon! thrice and more,Had Taste ne'er touch'd thy tranquil shore.Oh days! when to a girdle ty'dThe couples jingled at his side,And Damon swore he would not barterThe sportsman's girdle for a garter.Whoever came to kill an hour,Found easy Damon in their pow'r,Pure social Nature all his guide," Damon had not a grain of pride."He wish'd not to elude the snaresWhich Knav'ry plans, and Crast prepares,But rather wealth to crown their wiles,And win their universal smiles;For who are cheerful, who at ease,But they who cheat us as they please?He wink'd at many a gross designThe new-fall'n calf might countermine:Thus ev'ry fool allow'd his merit;" Yes, Damon had a gen'rous spirit."A coxcomb's jest, however vile,Was sure, at least, of Damon's smile;That coxcomb ne'er deny'd him sense;For why? it prov'd his own pretence:All own'd, were modesty away,Damon could shine as much as they.When wine and folly came in season,Damon ne'er strove to save his reason;Obnoxious to the mad uproar,A spy upon a hostile shore!'Twas this his company endear'd;Mirth never came till he appear'd.His lodgings—ev'ry draw'r could show 'em;The slave was kick'd who did not know 'em.Thus Damon, studious of his ease,And pleasing all whom mirth could please,Defy'd the world, like idle Colley,To shew a softer word than folly.Since Wisdom's gorgon-shield was knownTo stare the gazer into stone,He chose to trust in Folly's charm,To keep his breast alive and warm.At length grave Learning's sober trainRemark'd the trifler with disdain;The sons of Taste contemn'd his ways,And rank'd him with the brutes that graze,While they to nobler heights aspir'd,And grew belov'd, esteem'd, admir'd.Hence with our youth, not void of spirit,His old companions lost their merit,And ev'ry kind well-natur'd sotSeem'd a dull play without a plot,Where ev'ry yawning guest agreesThe willing creature strives to please:But temper never could amuse;It barely led us to excuse;'Twas true, conversing they averr'dAll they had seen, or felt, or heard;Talents of weight! for wights like theseThe law might chuse for witnesses;But sure th' attesting dry narrationIll suits a judge of conversation.What were their freedomsBoisterous mirth.? mere excusesTo vent ill manners, blows, and bruises.Yet freedom, gallant freedom! hailing,At form, at form, incessant railing,Would they examine each offence,Its latent cause, its known pretence,Punctilio ne'er was known to breed 'em,So sure as fond prolific freedom.Their courage? but a loaded gun,Machine the wise would wish to shun,Its guard unsafe, its lock an ill one,Where accident might fire and kill one.In short, disgusted out of measure,Thro' much contempt and slender pleasure,
His sense of dignity returns;With native pride his bosom burns;He seeks respect—but how to gain it?Wit, social mirth, could ne'er obtain it;And laughter where it reigns uncheck'd,Discards and dissipates respect:The man who gravely bows enjoys it,But shaking hands at once destroys it:Precarious plant! which, fresh and gay,Shrinks at the touch, and fades away!Come then, Reserve! yet from thy trainBanish Contempt and curs'd Disdain.Teach me, he cry'd, thy magic art,To act the decent distant part;To husband well my complaisance,Nor let ev'n Wit too far advance;But chuse calm Reason for my theme,In these her royal realms supreme,And o'er her charms, with caution shown,Be still a graceful umbrage thrown,And each abrupter period crown'dWith nods, and winks, and smiles, prosound,Till, rescu'd from the crowd beneath,No more with pain to move or breathe,I rise with head elate, to shareSalubrious draughts of purer air.Respect is won by grave pretenceAnd silence, surer ev'n than sense—'Tis hence the sacred grandeur springsOf Eastern—and of other kings,Or whence this awe to virtue due,While Virtue's distant as Peru?The sheathless sword the guard displays,Which round emits its dazzling rays;The stately fort, the turrets tall,Portcullis'd gate, and battled wall,Less screens the body than controls,And wards contempt from royal souls.The crowns they wear but check the eyeBefore it fondly pierce too nigh,That dazzled crowds may be employ'dAround the surface of—the void.O! 'tis the statesman's craft profoundTo scatter his amusements round,To tempt us from their conscious breast,Where full-fledg'd crimes enjoy their nest;Nor awes us ev'ry worth reveal'd,So deeply as each vice conceal'd.The lordly log, dispatch'd of yore,That the frog people might adore,With guards to keep them at a distance,Had reign'd, nor wanted Wit's assistance;Nay—had addresses from his nation,In praise of log-administration.PART THE THIRD.THE buoyant fires of youth were o'er,And same and finery pleas'd no more,Productive of that gen'ral stare,Which cool reflection ill can bear,And, crowds commencing mere vexation,Retirement sent its invitation.Romantic scenes of pendent hills,And verdant vales and falling rills,And mossy banks the fields adorn,Where Damon, simple Swain! was born.The Dryads rear'd a shady grove,Where such as think, and such as love,May safely sigh their summer's day,Or muse their silent hours away.The Oreads lik'd the climate well,And taught the level plain to swellIn verdant mounds, from whence the eyeMight all their larger works descry.The Naiads pour'd their urns around,From nodding rocks o'er vales profound;They form'd their streams to please the view,And bade them wind as serpents do,And having shewn them where to stray,Threw little pebbles in their way.These Fancy, all-sagacious maid!Had at their several tasks survey'd:
She saw and smil'd; and oft' would leadOur Damon's foot o'er hill and mead,There, with descriptive finger, traceThe genuine beauties of the place,And when she all its charms had shown,Prescribe improvements of her own." See yonder hill, so green, so round," Its brow with ambient beeches crown'd!" 'Twould well become thy gentle care" To raise a dome to Venus there;" Pleas'd would the nymphs thy zeal survey," And Venus in their arms repay." 'Twas such a shade and such a nook," In such a vale, near such a brook," From such a rocky fragment springing," That fam'd Apollo chose to sing in;" There let an altar wrought with art" Engage thy tuneful patron's heart:" How charming there to muse and warble" Beneath his bust of breathing marble!" With laurel wreath and mimic lyre," That crown a poet's vast desire:" Then, near it, scoop the vaulted cell" Where Music's charming maidsThe Muses. may dwell," Prone to indulge thy tender passion," And make thee many' an assignation." Deep in the grove's obscure retreat" Be plac'd Minerva's sacred seat;
" There let her awful turrets rise," (For Wisdom flies from vulgar eyes)" There her calm dictates shalt thou hear" Distinctly strike thy list'ning ear;" And who would shun the pleasing labour," To have Minerva for his neighbour?"In short, so charm'd each wild suggestion,Its truth was little call'd in question;And Damon dream'd he saw the FaunsAnd Nymphs distinctly skim the lawns;Now trac'd amid the trees, and thenLost in the circling shades again,With leer oblique their lover viewing—And Cupid—panting—and pursuing—" Fancy, enchanting Fair!" he cry'd," Be thou my goddess, thou my guide;" For thy bright visions I despise" What foes may think or friends advise." The feign'd concern, when folks survey" Expense, time, study, cast away;" The real spleen with which they see;" I please myself, and follow thee."Thus glow'd his breast, by Fancy warm'd,And thus the fairy landscape charm'd:But most he hop'd his constant careMight win the favour of the fair;And, wand'ring late thro' yonder glade,He thus the soft design betray'd." Ye Doves! for whom I rear'd the grove," With melting lays salute my love!" My Delia with your notes detain," Or I have rear'd the grove in vain." Ye Flow'rs! which early spring supplies," Display at once your brightest dyes," That she your op'ning charms may see," Or what were else your charms to me?" Kind Zephyr! brush each fragrant flow'r," And shed its odours round my bow'r," Or ne'er again, O gentle Wind!" Shall I in thee refreshment find." Ye Streams! if e'er your banks I lov'd," If e'er your native sounds improv'd," May each soft murmur sooth my fair," Or, oh! 'twill deepen my despair." Be sure, ye Willows! you be seen" Array'd in liveliest robes of green," Or I will tear your slighted boughs," And let them fade around my brows." And thou, my Grott! whose lonely bounds" The melancholy pine surrounds," May she admire thy peaceful gloom," Or thou shalt prove her lover's tomb."And now the lofty domes were rear'd,Loud laugh'd the squires, the rabble star'd." See, Neighbours! what our Damon's doing;" I think some folks are fond of ruin!
" I saw his sheep at random stray—" But he has thrown his crook away—" And builds such huts as, in foul weather," Are fit for sheep nor shepherd neither."Whence came the sober swain misled?Why, Phoebus put it in his head:Phoebus befriends him, we are told;And Phoebus coins bright tuns of gold.'Twere prudent not to be so vain on't,I think he'll never touch a grain on't.And if from Phoebus and his MuseMere earthly laziness ensues,'Tis plain, for aught that I can say,The dev'l inspires as well as they.So they—while fools of grosser kind,Less weeting what our bard design'd,Impute his schemes to real evil,That in these haunts he met the devil.He own'd, tho' their advice was vain,It suited wights who trod the plain;For dulness—tho' he might abhor it,In them he made allowance for it;Nor wonder'd, if beholding mottoes,And urns, and domes, and cells, and grottoes,Folks, little dreaming of the Muses,Were plagu'd to guess their proper uses.But did the Muses haunt his cell?Or in his dome did Venus dwell?
Did Pallas in his counsels share?The Delian god reward his pray'r?Or did his zeal engage the fair?When all the structure shone complete,Not much convenient, wondrous neat,Adorn'd with gilding, painting, planting,And the fair guests alone were wanting;Ah, me! ('twas Damon's own confession)Came Poverty and took possession.PART THE FOURTH.WHY droops my Damon, whilst he rovesThro' ornamented meads and groves?Near columns, obelisks, and spires,Which ev'ry critic eye admires?'Tis Poverty, detested maid!Sole tenant of their ample shade;'Tis she that robs him of his ease,And bids their very charms displease.But now, by Fancy long controll'd,And with the sons of Taste enroll'd,He deem'd it shameful to commenceFirst minister to Common-sense;Far more elated to pursueThe lowest talk of dear vertû.And now, behold his lofty soul,That whilome flew from pole to pole,Settle on some elab'rate flow'r,And, like a bee, the sweets devour!
Now, of a rose enamour'd, proveThe wild solicitudes of love!Now in a lily's cup enshrin'd,Forego the commerce of mankind!As in these toils he wore awayThe calm remainder of his day,Conducting sun, and shade, and show'r,As most might glad the new-born flow'r,So Fate ordain'd—before his eye—Starts up the long-sought butterfly,While flutt'ring round, her plumes unfoldCelestial crimson dropp'd with gold.Adieu, ye bands of flow'rets fair!The living beauty claims his care:For this he strips—nor bolt nor chainCould Damon's warm pursuit restrain.See him o'er hill, morass, or mound,Where'er the speckled game is found,Tho' bent with age, with zeal pursue,And totter tow'rds the prey in view.Nor rock nor stream his steps retard,Intent upon the bless'd reward!One vassal fly repays the chase!A wing, a film, rewards the race!Rewards him, tho' disease attend,And in a fatal surfeit end.So fierce Camilla skimm'd the plain,Smit with the purple's pleasing stain;
She ey'd intent the glitt'ring stranger,And knew, alas! nor fear nor danger,Till deep within her panting heartMalicious Fate impell'd the dart.How studious he what fav'rite foodRegales Dame Nature's tiny brood!What junkets fat the filmy people!And what liqueurs they chuse to tipple!Behold him, at some crise, prescribe,And raise with drugs the sick'ning tribe!Or haply, when their spirits fau'ter,Sprinkling my Lord of Cloyne's tar-water.When Nature's brood of insects dies,See how he pimps for am'rous flies!See him the timely succour lend her,And help the wantons to engender!Or see him guard their pregnant hour,Exert his soft obstetric pow'r,And, lending each his lenient hand,With new-born grubs enrich the land!O WilksAlluding to moths and butterflies, delineated by Benjamin Wilks. See his very expensive proposals.! what poet's loftiest laysCan match thy labours and thy praise?Immortal Sage! by Fate decreedTo guard the moth's illustrious breed!Till flutt'ring swarms on swarms arise,And all our wardrobes teem with flies!And must we praise this taste for toys?Admire it then in girls and boys.Ye youths of fifteen years, or more!Resign your moths—the season's o'er;'Tis time more social joys to prove;'Twere now your nobler task—to love.Let ***'s eyes more deeply warm,Nor slighting Nature's fairest form,The bias of your souls determineTow'rds the mean love of Nature's vermine.But, ah! how wondrous few have knownTo give each stage of life its own.'Tis the pretexta's utmost bound,With radiant purple edg'd around,To please the child, whose glowing dyesToo long delight maturer eyes;And few, but with regret, assumeThe plain-wrought labours of the loom.Ah! let not me by fancy steer,When life's antumnal clouds appear;Nor ev'n in learning's long delaysConsume my fairest, fruitless days;Like him who should in armour spendThe sums that armour should defend.A while in Pleasure's myrtle bow'rWe share her smiles and bless her pow'r,But find at last we vainly striveTo fix the worst coquette alive.O you! that with assiduous flameHave long pursu'd the faithless dame,Forsake her soft abodes a while,And dare her frown, and slight her smile;Nor scorn, whatever wits may say,The footpath road, the king's highway:No more the scrup'lous charmer teaze,But seek the roofs of honest Ease;The rival fair, no more pursu'd,Shall there with forward pace intrude;Shall there her ev'ry art essay,To win you to her slighted sway,And grant your scorn a glance more fairThan e'er she gave your fondest pray'r.But would you happiness pursue?Partake both ease and pleasure too?Would you, thro' all your days, dispenseThe joys of reason and of sense?Or give to life the most you can?Let social virtue shape the plan:For does not to the virtuous deedA train of pleasing sweets succeed?Or, like the sweets of wild desire,Did social pleasures ever tire?Yet midst the group be some preferr'd,Be some abhorr'd—for Damon err'd;And such there are—of fair address—As 'twere unsocial to caress.
O learn by Reason's equal ruleTo shun the praise of knave or fool;Then tho' you deem it better stillTo gain some rustic 'squire's good will,And souls, however mean or vile,Like features, brighten by a smile,Yet Reason holds it for a crimeThe trivial breast should share thy time;And Virtue with reluctant eyesBeholds this human sacrifice!Thro' deep reserve and air erect,Mistaken Damon won respect,But could the specious homage passWith any creature but an ass?If conscious, they who fear'd the skinWould scorn the sluggish brute within.What awe-struck slaves the tow'rs encloseWhere Persian monarchs eat and doze!What prostrate rev'rence all agreeTo pay a prince they never see!Mere vassals of a royal throne;The Sophi's virtues must be shownTo make the reverence his own.As for Thalia—wouldst thou make herThy bride without a portion?—take her:She will with duteous care attend,And all thy pensive hours befriend;
Will swell thy joys, will share thy pain,With thee rejoice, with thee complain;Will smooth thy pillow, plait thy bow'rs,And bind thine aching head with flow'rs.But be this previous maxim known—If thou canst feed on Love alone,If, bless'd with her, thou canst sustainContempt, and poverty, and pain;If so—then rifle all her graces—And fruitful be your fond embraces!Too soon, by caitiff-spleen inspir'd,Sage Damon to his groves retir'd,The path disclaim'd by sober reason;Retirement claims a later season,Ere active youth and warm desiresHave quite withdrawn their ling'ring fires.With the warm bosom ill agreeOr limpid stream or shady tree;Love lurks within the rosy bow'r,And claims the speculative hour;Ambition finds his calm retreat,And bids his pulse too fiercely beat;Ev'n social Friendship duns his ear,And cites him to the public sphere.Does he resist their genuine force?His temper takes some froward course,Till passion, misdirected, sighsFor weeds, or shells, or grubs, or flies!Far happiest he whose early days,Spent in the social paths of praise,Leave fairly printed on his mindA train of virtuous deeds behind:From this rich fund the mem'ry drawsThe lasting meed of self-applause.Such fair ideas lend their aidTo people the sequester'd shade:Such are the Naiads, Nymphs, and Fauns,That haunt his floods or cheer his lawns.If, where his devious ramble strays,He Virtue's radiant form surveys,She seems no longer now to wearThe rigid mien, the frown severeAlluding to—The allegory in Cebes's Tablet.;To shew him her remote abode,To point the rocky arduous road;But from each flower his fields allowShe twines a garland for his brow.ECONOMY, A RHAPSODY, ADDRESSED TO YOUNG POETS.Insanis; omnes gelidis quicunque lacernisSunt tibi, Nasones Virgiliosque vides.MARTIMITATION.—Thou know'st not what thou say'st;In garments that scarce fence them from the coldOur Ovids and our Virgils you behold.PART THE FIRST.To you, ye Bards! whose lavish breast requiresThis monitory lay, the strains belong:Nor think some miser vents his sapient saw,Or some dull cit, unfeeling of the charmsThat tempt profusion, sings; while friendly Zeal,To guard from fatal ills the tribe he loves,Inspires the meanest of the Muse's train!Like you I loathe the grov'lling progeny,Whose wily arts, by creeping time matur'd,Advance them high on Pow'r's tyrannic throne,To lord it there in gorgeous uselessness,And spurn successless Worth that pines below!See the rich churl, amid the social sonsOf wine and wit regaling! hark, he joinsIn the free jest delighted! seems to shewA meliorated heart! he laughs, he sings.
Songs of gay import, madrigals of glee,And drunken anthems, set agape the board,Like DemeaIn Terence's Adelphi., in the play, benign and mild,And pouring forth benevolence of soul,Till Micio wonder; or, in Shakespeare's line,Obstrep'rous SilenceJustice Silence, in Shakespeare's Henry IV. 2d part., drowning Shallow's voice,And startling Falstaff and his mad compeers.He owns 'tis prudence, ever and anon,To smooth his careful brow, to let his purseOpe to a sixpence's diameter.He likes our ways: he owns the ways of witAre ways of pleasance, and deserve regard.True, we are dainty good society,But what art thou? Alas! consider well,Thou bane of social pleasure, know thyself:Thy fell approach, like some invasive dampBreath'd thro' the pores of earth from Stygian caves,Destroys the lamp of mirth; the lamp which we,Its flamens, boast to guard; we know not how,But at thy sight the fading flame assumesA ghastly blue, and in a stench expires.True, thou seem'st chang'd; all sainted, all ensky'd:The trembling tears that charge thy melting eyesSay thou art honest, and of gentle kind:But all is false! an intermitting sigh
Condemns each hour, each moment giv'n to smiles,And deems those only lost thou dost not lose.Ev'n for a demi-groat this open'd soul,This boon companion, this elastic breast,Revibrates quick, and sends the tuneful tongueTo lavish music on the rugged wallsOf some dark dungeon. Hence, thou Caitiff! fly;Touch not my glass, nor drain my sacred bowl,Monster ingrate! beneath one common skyWhy shouldst thou breathe? beneath one common roofThou ne'er shalt harbour, nor my little boatReceive a soul with crimes to press it down.Go to thy bags, thou Recreant! hourly go,And, gazing there, bid them be wit, be mirth,Be conversation. Not a face that smilesAdmit thy presence! not a soul that glowsWith social purport, bid, or ev'n or morn,Invest thee happy! but when life declines,May thy sure heirs stand titt'ring round thy bed,And, ush'ring in their fav'rites, burst thy locks,And fill their laps with gold, till Want and CareWith joy depart, and cry, "We ask no more."Ah! never, never may th' harmonious mindEndure the worldly! Poets, ever voidOf guile, distrustless, scorn the treasur'd gold,And spurn the miser, spurn his deity.Balanc'd with friendship, in the poet's eyeThe rival scale of int'rest kicks the beam,
Than lightning swifter. From his cavern'd storeThe sordid soul, with self-applause, remarksThe kind propensity; remarks and smiles,And hies with impious haste to spread the snare.Him we deride, and in our comic scenesContemn the niggard form Moliere has drawn:We loathe with justice; but, alas! the painTo bow the knee before this calf of gold,Implore his envious aid, and meet his frown!But 'tis not Gomez, 'tis not he whose heartIs crusted o'er with dross, whose callous mindIs senseless as his gold, the slighted MuseIntensely loathes. Tis sure no equal taskTo pardon him who lavishes his wealthOn racer, fox-hound, hawk, or spaniel, allBut human merit; who with gold essaysAll but the noblest pleasure, to removeThe wants of Genius, and its smiles enjoy.But you, ye titled youths! whose nobler zealWould burnish o'er your coronets with fame,Who listen pleas'd when poet tunes his lay,Permit him not in distant solitudesTo pine, to languish out the fleeting hoursOf active youth; then Virtue pants for praise.That season unadorn'd, the careless bardQuits your worn threshold, and, like honest Gay,Contemns the niggard boon ye time so ill.Your favours then, like trophies giv'n the tomb,
Th' enfranchis'd spirit soaring not perceives,Or scorns perceiv'd, and execrates the smileWhich bade his vig'rous bloom, to treach'rous hopesAnd servile cares a prey, expire in vain!—Two lawless pow'rs, engag'd by mutual hateIn endless war, beneath their flags enrolThe vassal world: this Avarice is nam'd,That Luxury: 'tis true their partial friendsAssign them softer names; usurpers both!That share by dint of arms the legal throneOf just Economy; yet both betray'dBy fraudful ministers. The niggard chiefList'ning to want, all faithless, and prepar'dTo join each moment in his rival's train,His conduct models by the needless fearsThe slave inspires, while Luxury, a chiefOf amplest faith, to Plenty's rule resignsHis whole campaign. 'Tis Plenty's flatt'ring soundsEngross his ear; 'tis Plenty's smiling formMoves still before his eye. Discretion strives,But strives in vain, to banish from the throneThe perjur'd minion: he, secure of trust,With latent malice to the hostile campDay, night, and hour, his monarch's wealth conveys.Ye tow'ring minds! ye sublimated souls!Who, careless of your fortunes, seal and sign,Set, let, contract, acquit, with easier mienThan fops take snuff! whose economic care
Your green silk purse engrosses! easy, pleas'd,To see gold sparkle thro' the subtle folds,Lovely as when th' Hesperian fruitage smil'dAmid the verd'rous grove! who fondly hopeSpontaneous harvests! harvests all the year!Who scatter wealth, as tho' the radiant cropGlitter'd on ev'ry bough; and ev'ry bough,Like that the Trojan gather'd, once avuls'dWere by a splendid successor supply'dInstant, spontaneous! listen to my lays;For 'tis not fools, whate'er proverbial phraseHave long decreed, that quit with greatest easeThe treasur'd gold. Of words indeed profuse,Of gold tenacious, their torpescent soulClenches their coin, and what electral fireShall solve the frosty gripe, and bid it flow?'Tis genius, fancy, that to wild expenseOf health, of treasure, stimulates the soul:These with officious care and fatal artImprove the vinous flavour; these the smileOf Cloe soften; these the glare of dressIllume, the glitt'ring chariot gild anew,And add strange wisdom to the furs of Pow'r.Alas! that he, amid the race of men,That he, who thinks of purest gold with scorn,Should with unsated appetite demand,And vainly court the pleasure it procures!When Fancy's vivid spark impels the soul
To scorn quotidian scenes, to spurn the blissOf vulgar minds, what nostrum shall composeIts fatal tension? in what lonely valeOf balmy Med'cine's various field aspiresThe bless'd refrigerant? Vain, ah! vain the hopeOf future peace, this orgasm uncontroll'd!Impatient, hence, of all the frugal mindRequires; to eat, to drink to sleep, to fillA chest with gold, the sprightly breast demandsIncessant rapture; life a tedious loadDeny'd its continuity of joy.But whence obtain? philosophy requiresNo lavish cost; to crown its utmost pray'rSuffice the root-built cell, the simple fleece,The juicy viand, and the crystal stream.Ev'n mild Stupidity rewards her trainWith cheap contentment. Taste alone requiresEntire profusion! Days, and nights, and hours,Thy voice, hydropic Fancy! calls aloudFor costly draughts, inundant bowls of joy,Rivers of rich regalement, seas of bliss,Seas without shore! infinity of sweets!And yet, unless sage Reason join her handIn Pleasure's purchase, pleasure is unsure:And yet, unless Economy's consentLegitimate expense, some graceless mark,Some symptom ill-conceal'd, shall, soon or late,Burst like a pimple from the vicious tide
Of acid blood, proclaiming Want's diseaseAmidst the bloom of shew. The scanty stream,Slow-loit'ring in its channel, seems to vieWith Vaga's depth; but should the sedgy pow'r,Vain-glorious, empty his penurious urnO'er the rough rock, how must his fellow streamsDeride the tinklings of the boastive rill!I not aspire to mark the dubious pathThat leads to wealth, to poets mark'd in vain!But ere self-flatt'ry sooth the vivid breastWith dreams of fortune near allay'd to fame,Reflect how few who charm'd the list'ning earOf satrap or of king her smiles enjoy'd!Consider well what meagre alms repay'dThe great Maeonian! sire of tuneful song,And prototype of all that soar'd sublime,And left dull cares below; what griefs impell'dThe modest bard of learn'd Eliza's reignTo swell with tears his Mulla's parent stream,And mourn aloud the pang "to ride, to run," To spend, to give, to want, to be undone."Why should I tell of Cowley's pensive Muse,Belov'd in vain? too copious is my theme!Which of your boasted race might hope rewardLike loyal Butler, when the lib'ral Charles,The judge of wit, perus'd the sprightly page,Triumphant o'er his foes? Believe not hope,The poet's parasite; but learn alone
To spare the scanty boon the Fates decree.Poet and rich! 'tis solecism extreme!'Tis heighten'd contradiction! in his frame,In ev'ry nerve and fibre of his soul,The latent seeds and principles of wantHas Nature wove, and Fate confirm'd the clue.Nor yet despair to shun the ruder gripeOf Penury: with nice precision learnA dollar's value. Foremost in the pageThat marks th' expense of each revolving yearPlace inattention. When the lust of praise,Or honour's false idea, tempts thy soulTo slight frugality, assure thine heartThat danger's near. This perishable coinIs no vain ore. It is thy liberty;It fetters misers, but it must aloneEnfranchise thee. The world, the cit-like world,Bids thee beware; thy little craft essay;Nor, piddling with a tea-spoon's slender form,See with soup-ladles devils gormandize.Economy! thou good old aunt! whose mien,Furrow'd with age and care, the wise adore,The wits contemn! reserving still thy storesTo cheer thy friends at last! why with the citOr bookless churl, with each ignoble name,Each earthly nature, deign'st thou to reside?And shunning all, who by thy favours crown'dMight glad the world, to seek some vulgar mind,
Inspiring pride, and selfish shapes of ill?Why with the old, infirm, and impotent,And childless, love to dwell, yet leave the breastOf youth unwarn'd, unguided, uninform'd?Of youth, to whom thy monitory voiceWere doubly kind? for, sure, to youthful eyes,(How short soe'er it prove) the road of lifeAppears protracted; fair on either sideThe Loves, the Graces play, on Fortune's childProfusely smiling: well might youth essayThe frugal plan, the lucrative employ,Source of their favour all the live-long day,But Fate assents not. Age alone contractsHis meagre palm, to clench the tempting baneOf all his peace, the glitt'ring seeds of care!O that the Muse's voice might pierce the earOf gen'rous youth! for youth deserves her song.Youth is fair virtue's season, virtue thenRequires the pruner's hand; the sequent stage,It barely vegetates; nor long the spaceEre, robb'd of warmth, its arid trunk displayFell Winter's total reign. O lovely sourceOf gen'rous foibles, youth! when op'ning mindsAre honest as the light, lucid as air,As fost'ring breezes kind, as linnets gay,Tender as buds, and lavish as the spring!Yet, hapless state of man! his earliest youthCozens itself; his age defrauds mankind.Nor deem it strange that rolling years abradeThe social bias. Life's extensive page,What does it but unfold repeated proofsOf gold's omnipotence? With patriots, friends,Sick'ning beneath its ray, enervate some,And others dead, whose putrid name exhalesA noisome scent, the bulky volume teems:With kinsmen, brothers, sons, moist'ning the shroud,Or honouring the grave, with specious griefOf short duration, soon in Fortune's beamsAlert, and wond'ring at the tears they shed.But who shall save, by tame prosaic strain,That glowing breast where wit with youth conspiresTo sweeten luxury? The fearful MuseShall yet proceed, tho' by the faintest gleamOf hope inspir'd, to warn the train she loves.PART THE SECOND.IN some dark season, when the misty show'rObscures the sun, and saddens all the sky,When linnets drop the wing, nor grove nor streamInvites thee forth to sport thy drooping Muse,Seize the dull hour, nor with regret assignTo worldly prudence. She, nor nice nor coy,Accepts the tribute of a joyless day;She smiles well-pleas'd when wit and mirth recede,And not a Grace and not a Muse will hear.Then from majestic Maro's awful strain,
Or tow'ring Homer, let thine eye descendTo trace, with patient industry, the pageOf income and expense: and, oh! bewareThy breast, self-flatt'ring; place no courtly smile,No golden promise of your faithless Muse,Nor latent mine which Fortune's hand may shew,Amid thy solid store: the Siren's songWrecks not the list'ning sailor half so sure.See by what avenues, what devious paths,The foot of Want, detested, steals along,And bars each fatal pass! Some few short hoursOf punctual care, the refuse of thy year,On frugal schemes employ'd, shall give the MuseTo sing intrepid many a cheerful day.But if too soon before the tepid galesThy resolution melt, and ardent vows,In wary hours preferr'd, or die forgot,Or seem the forc'd effect of hazy skies,Then, ere surprise, by whose impetuous rageThe massy fort, with which thy gentler breastI not compare is won, the song proceeds.Knw, too, by Nature's undiminish'd law,Throughout her realms obey'd, the various partsOf deep creation, atoms, systems, all,Attract and are attracted; nor prevails the lawAlone in matter; soul alike with soulAspires to join; nor yet in souls alone,In each idea it imbibes is sound
The kind propensity; and when they meetAnd grow familiar, various tho' their tribe,Their tempers various, vow perpetual faith;That should the world's disjointed frame once moreTo chaos yield the sway, amid the wreckTheir union should survive; with Roman warmth,By sacred hospitable laws endear'd,Should each idea recollect its friend.Here then we fix; on this perennial baseErect thy safety, and defy the storm.Let soft Profusion's fair idea joinHer hand with Poverty; nor here desist,Till o'er the group that forms their various trainThou sing loud hymenéals. Let the prideOf outward shew in lasting leagues combineWith shame thread-bare; the gay vermilion faceOf rash Intemp'rance be discreetly pair'dWith sallow Hunger: the licentious joyWith mean dependence; ev'n the dear delightOf sculpture, paint, intaglios, books, and coins,Thy breast, sagacious Prudence! shall connectWith filth and beggary, nor disdain to linkWith black Insolvency. Thy soul, alarm'd,Shall shun the Siren's voice, nor boldly dareTo bid the soft enchantress share thy breast,With such a train of horrid fiends conjoin'd.Nor think, ye sordid race! ye grov'lling minds!I frame the song for you; for you the Muse
Could other rules impart. The friendly strain,For gentler bosoms plann'd, to yours would proveThe juice of lurid aconite, exceedWhatever Colchos bore, and in your breastCompassion, love, and friendship, all destroy.It greatly shall avail, if e'er thy storesIncrease apace by periodic daysOf annual payment, or thy patron's boon,The lean reward of gross unbounded praise!It much avails to seize the present hour,And, undeliberating, call aroundThy hungry creditors; their horrid rageWhen once appeas'd, the small remaining storeShall rise in weight tenfold, in lustre rise,As gold improv'd by many a fierce assay.'Tis thus the frugal husbandman directsHis narrow stream, if o'er its wonted banks,By sudden rains impell'd, it proudly swell;His timely hand thro' better tracks conveysThe quick-decreasing tide, ere borne alongOr thro' the wild morass, or cultur'd field,Or bladed grass mature, or barren sands,It flow destructive, or it flow in vain!But happiest he who sanctifies expenseBy present pay; who subjects not his fameTo tradesmen's varlets, nor bequeaths his name,His honour'd name, to deck the vulgar pageOf base mechanic, sordid, unsincere!
There haply, while thy Muse sublimely soarsBeyond this earthly sphere, in heav'n's abodes,And dreams of nectar and ambrosial sweets,Thy growing debt steals unregarded o'erThe punctual record, till nor Phoebus' self,Nor sage Minerva's art, can aught availTo sooth the ruthless dun's detested rage:Frantic and fell, with many a curse profaneHe loads the gentle Muse, then hurls thee downTo want, remorse, captivity, and shame.Each public place, the glitt'ring haunts of men,With horror fly. Why loiter near thy bane?—Why fondly linger on a hostile shoreDisarm'd, defenceless? why require to treadThe precipice? or why, alas! to breatheA moment's space where ev'ry breeze is death?Death to thy future peace! Away, collectThy dissipated mind; contract thy trainOf wild ideas, o'er the flow'ry fieldsOf shew diffus'd, and speed to safer climes.Economy presents her glass, acceptThe faithful mirror, pow'rful to discloseA thousand forms unseen by careless eyes,That plot thy fate. Temptation in a robeOf Tyrian dye, with ev'ry sweet perfum'd,Besets thy sense; Extortion follows closeHer wanton step, and Ruin brings the rear.These and the rest shall her mysterious glass
Embody to thy view; like Venus kind,When to her lab'ring son the 'vengeful pow'rsThat urg'd the fall of Ilium she display'd:He, not imprudent, at the sight declin'dTh' inequal conflict, and decreed to raiseThe Trojan welfare on some happier shore.For here to drain thy swelling purse awaitA thousand arts, a thousand frauds attend:" The cloud-wrought canes, the gorgeous snuff boxes," The twinkling jewels, and the gold etwee," With all its bright inhabitants, shall waste" Its melting stores, and in the dreary void" Leave not a doit behind." Ere yet exhaustIts flimsy folds offend thy pensive eye,Away! embosom'd deep in distant shades,Nor seen nor seeing, thou may'st vent thy scornOf lace, embroid'ry, purple, gems, and gold!There of the farded fop and essenc'd beau,Ferocious, with a Stoic's frown discloseThy manly scorn, averse to tinsel pomp,And fluent thine harangue. But can thy soulDeny thy limbs the radiant grace of dress,Where dress is merit! where thy graver friendShall with thee burnish'd! where the sprightly fairDemand embellishment! ev'n Delia's eye,As in a garden, roves, of hues aloneInquirent, curious? Fly the curs'd domain;These are the realms of luxury and shew,No classic soil; away! the bloomy spring
Attracts thee hence; the waning autumn warns;Fly to thy native shades, and dread, ev'n there,Lest busy fancy tempt thy narrow stateBeyond its bounds. Observe Florelio's mien:Why treads my friend with melancholy stepThat beauteous lawn? why, pensive, strays his eyeO'er statues, grottoes, urns, by critic artProportion'd fair? or from his lofty dome,Bright glitt'ring thro' the grove, returns his eyeUnpleas'd, disconsolate? And is it love,Disastrous love, that robs the finish'd scenesOf all their beauty? cent'ring all in herHis soul adores? or from a blacker causeSprings this remorseful gloom? Is conscious guiltThe latent source of more than love's despair?It cannot be within that polish'd breast,Where science dwells, that guilt should harbour there.No; 'tis the sad survey of present wantAnd past profusion! lost to him the sweetsOf yon' pavilion, fraught with ev'ry charmFor other eyes; or if remaining, proofsOf criminal expense! Sweet interchangeOf river, valley, mountain, woods, and plains!How gladsome once he rang'd your native turf,Your simple scenes, how raptur'd! ere ExpenseHad lavish'd thousand ornaments, and taughtConvenience to perplex him, Art to pall,Pomp to deject, and Beauty to displease!Oh! for a soul to all the glare of wealth,To Fortune's wide exhaustless treasury,Nobly superior! but let Caution guideThe coy disposal of the wealth we scorn,And Prudence be our almoner. Alas!The pilgrim wand'ring o'er some distant clime,Sworn foe of avarice! not disdains to learnIts coin's imputed worth, the destin'd meansTo smooth his passage to the favour'd shrine.Ah! let not us, who tread this stranger world,Let none who sojourn on the realms of life,Forget the land is merc'nary, nor wasteHis fare ere landed on no venal shore.Let never bard consult Palladio's rules;Let never bard, O Burlington! surveyThy learned art, in Chiswick's dome display'd;Dang'rous incentive! nor with ling'ring eyeSurvey the window Venice calls her own.Better for him with no ingrateful MuseTo sing a requiem to that gentle soulWho plann'd the skylight, which to lavish bardsConveys alone the pure ethereal ray;For garrets him, and squalid walls, await,Unless, presageful, from this friendly strainHe glean advice, and shun the scribbler's doom.PART THE THIRD.YET once again, and to thy doubtful fateThe trembling Muse consigns thee. Ere Contempt,Or Want's empoison'd arrow, ridicule,Transfix thy weak unguarded breast, behold!The poet's roofs, the careless poet's, hisWho scorns advice, shall close my serious lay.When Gulliver, now great, now little deem'd,The plaything of Comparison, arriv'dWhere learned bosoms their aërial schemesProjected, studious of the public weal,'Mid these one subtler artist he descry'd,Who cherish'd in his dusty tenementThe spider's web, injurious, to supplantFair Albion's fleeces! Never, never mayOur monarch on such fatal purpose smile,And irritate Minerva's beggar'd sons,The Melksham weavers! Here in ev'ry nookTheir wests they spun, here revell'd uncontroll'd,And, like the flags from Westminster's high roofDependent, here their flutt'ring textures wav'd.Such, so adorn'd, the cell I mean to sing!Cell ever squalid! where the sneerful maidWill not fatigue her hand, broom never comes,That comes to all, o'er whose quiescent wallsArachne's unmolested care has drawnCurtains subfulk, and save th' expense of art.Survey those walls, in fady texture clad,Where wand'ring snails in many a slimy path,Free, unrestrain'd, their various journies crawl;Peregrinations strange, and labyrinthsConfus'd, inextricable! such the clueOf Cretan Ariadne ne'er explain'd!Hooks! angles! crooks! and involutions wild!Mean-time, thus silver'd with meanders gay,In mimic pride the snail-wrought tissue shines,Perchance of tabby, or of harrateen,Not ill expressive; such the pow'r of snails!Behold his chair, whose fractur'd seat infirmAn aged cushion hides! replete with dustThe foliag'd velvet, pleasing to the eyeOf great Eliza's reign, but now the snareOf weary guest that on the specious bedSits down confiding. Ah! disastrous wight!In evil hour and rashly dost thou trustThe fraudful couch! for tho' in velvet cas'd,The fated thigh shall kiss the dusty floor.The trav'ller thus, that o'er Hibernian plainsHath shap'd his way, on beds profuse of flow'rs,Cowslip, or primrose, or the circ'lar eyeOf daisy fair, decrees to bask supine.And see! delighted, down he drops, secureOf sweet refreshment, ease without annoy,Or luscious noon-day nap. Ah! much deceiv'd,Much suff'ring pilgrim! thou nor noon-day nap
Nor sweet repose shalt find; the false morassIn quiv'ring undulations yields beneathThy burden, in the miry gulf enclos'd!And who would trust appearance? cast thine eyeWhere 'mid machines of het'rogeneous formHis coat depends; alas! his only coat,Eldest of things! and napless, as an heathOf small extent by fleecy myriads graz'd.Not diff'rent have I seen in dreary vaultDisplay'd a coffin; on each sable sideThe texture unmolested seems entire;Fraudful, when touch'd it glides to dust away,And leaves the wond'ring swain to gape, to stare,And with expressive shrug and piteous sighDeclare the fatal force of rolling years,Or dire extent of frail mortality.This aged vesture, scorn of gazing beausAnd formal cits, (themselves too haply scorn'd)Both on its sleeve and on its skirt retainsFull many a pin wide-sparkling: for it e'erTheir well-known crest met his delighted eye,Tho' wrapt in thought, commercing with the sky,He, gently stooping, scorn'd not to upraise,And on each sleeve, as conscious of their use,Indenting fix them; nor, when arm'd with these,The cure of rents and separations dire,And chasms enormous, did he view dismay'dHedge, bramble, thicket, bush, portending fate
To breeches, coat, and hose! had any wightOf vulgar skill the tender texture own'd;But gave his mind to form a sonnet quaintOf Silvia's shoe-string, or of Chloe's fan,Or sweetly-fashion'd tip of Celia's ear.Alas! by frequent use decays the forceOf mortal art! the refractory robeEludes the tailor's art, eludes his own;How potent once, in union quaint conjoin'd!See near his bed (his bed, too falsely call'dThe Place of Rest, while it a bard sustains,Pale, meagre, muse-rid wight! who reads in vainNarcotic volumes o'er) his candlestick,Radiant machine! when from the plastic handOf Mulciber, the may'r of Birmingham,The engine issu'd; now, alas! disguis'dBy many an unctuous tide, that wand'ring downIts sides congeal; what he, perhaps, essays,With humour forc'd, and ill-dissembled smile,Idly to liken to the poplar's trunkWhen o'er its bark the lucid amber, woundIn many a pleasing fold, incrusts the tree;Or suits him more the winter's candy'd thorn,When from each branch, anneal'd, the works of frostPervasive, radiant icicles depend?How shall I sing the various ill that waitsThe careful sonnetteer? or who can paintThe shifts enormous that in vain he forms
To patch his paneless window; to cementHis batter'd tea-pot, ill-retentive vase!To war with ruin? anxious to concealWant's fell appearance, of the real illNor foe nor fearful. Ruin unforeseenInvades his chattels; Ruin will invade,Will claim his whole invention to repair,Nor of the gift, for tuneful ends design'd,Allow one part to decorate his song;While Ridicule, with ever-pointing hand,Conscious of ev'ry shift, of ev'ry shiftIndicative, his in most plot betrays,Points to the nook, which he his Study calls,Pompous and vain! for thus he might esteemHis chest a wardrobe, purse a treasury;And shews, to crown her full display, himself;One whom the pow'rs above, in place of healthAnd wonted vigour, of paternal cotOr little farm; of bag, or scrip, or staff,Cup, dish, spoon, plate, or worldly utensil,A poet fram'd; yet fram'd not to repine,And wish the cobbler's loftiest site his own;Nor, partial as they seem, upbraid the Fates,Who to the humbler mechanism join'dGoods so superior, such exalted bliss!See with what seeming ease, what labour'd peace,He, hapless hypocrite! refines his nail,His chief amusement! then how feign'd, how forc'd,
That care-defying sonnet which impliesHis debts discharg'd, and he of half a crownIn full possession, uncontested rightAnd property! Yet, ah! whoe'er this wightAdmiring view, if such there be, distrustThe vain pretence; the smiles that harbour grief,As lurks the serpent deep in flow'rs enwreath'd.Forewarn'd, be frugal, or with prudent rageThy pen demolish; chuse the trustier flail,And bless those labours which the choice inspir'd.But if thou view'st a vulgar mind, a wightOf common sense, who seeks no brighter name,Him envy, him admire, him, from thy breast,Prescient of future dignities, saluteSheriff, or may'r, in comfortable fursEnwrapt, secure: nor yet the laureat's crownIn thought exclude him! he perchance shall riseTo nobler heights than foresight can decree.When fir'd with wrath for his intrigues display'dIn many an idle song, Saturnian JoveVow'd sure destruction to the tuneful race,Appeas'd by suppliant Phoebus; "Bards," he said," Henceforth of plenty, wealth, and pomp, debarr'd," But fed by frugal cares, might wear the bay" Secure of thunder."—Low the Delian bow'd,Nor at th' invidious favour dar'd repine.THE RUIN'D ABBEY: OR, THE EFFECTS OF SUPERSTITION.AT length fair Peace, with olive crown'd, regainsHer lawful throne, and to the sacred hauntsOf wood or fount the frighted Muse returns.Happy the bard who, from his native hills,Soft musing on a summer's eve, surveysHis azure stream, with pensile woods enclos'd,Or o'er the glassy surface with his friend,Or faithful fair, thro' bord'ring willows greenWasts his small frigate. Fearless he of shoutsOr taunts, the rhet'ric of the wat'ry crew,That ape confusion from the realms they rule;Fearless of these; who shares the gentler voiceOf peace and music; birds of sweetest songAttune from native boughs their various lay,And cheer the forest; birds of brighter plumeWith busy pinion skim the glitt'ring wave,And tempt the sun, ambitious to displayTheir several merit, while the vocal fluteOr number'd verse, by female voice endear'd,Crowns his delight, and mollifies the scene.If solitude his wand'ring steps inviteTo some more deep recess, (for hours there areWhen gay, when social, minds to Friendship's voiceOr Beauty's charm her wild abodes prefer)
How pleas'd he treads her venerable shades,Her solemn courts! the centre of the grove!The root-built cave, by far extended rocksAround embosom'd, how it sooths the soul!If scoop'd at first by superstitious handsThe rugged cell receiv'd alone the shoalsOf bigot minds, Religion dwells not here,Yet Virtue pleas'd, at intervals, retires:Yet here may Wisdom, as she walks the maze,Some serious truths collect, the rules of life,And serious truths of mightier weight than gold!I ask not wealth; but let me hoard with care,With frugal cunning, with a niggard's art,A few fix'd principles, in early life,Ere indolence impede the search, explor'd;Then like old Latimer, when age impairsMy judgment's eye, when quibbling schools attackMy grounded hope, or subtler wits deride,Will I not blush to shun the vain debate,And this mine answer; "Thus, 'twas thus I thought," My mind yet vigorous, and my soul entire;" Thus will I think, averse to listen more" To intricate discussion, prone to stray." Perhaps my reason may but ill defend" My settled faith; my mind, with age impair'd," Too sure its own infirmities declare." But I am arm'd by caution, studious youth," And early foresight: now the winds may rise,
" The tempest whistle, and the billows roar;" My pinnace rides in port, despoil'd and worn," Shatter'd by time and storms, but while it shuns" Th' inequal conflict, and declines the deep," Sees the strong vessel fluctuate, less secure."Thus while he strays, a thousand rural scenesSuggest instruction, and instructing please.And see betwixt the grove's extended armsAn Abbey's rude remains attract thy view,Gilt by the mid-day sun: with ling'ring stepProduce thine axe, (for, aiming to destroyTree, branch, or shade, for never shall thy breastToo long deliberate) with tim'rous handRemove th' obstructive bough; nor yet refuse,Tho' sighing, to destroy that fav'rite pine,Rais'd by thine hand, in its luxuriant primeOf beauty fair, that screens the vast remains.Aggriev'd, but constant as the Roman sire,The rigid Manlius, when his conqu'ring sonBled by a parent's voice, the cruel meedOf virtuous ardour timelessly display'd;Nor cease till, thro' the gloomy road, the pileGleam unobstructed: thither oft' thine eyeShall sweetly wander; thence returning, soothWith pensive scenes thy philosophic mind.These were thy haunts, thy opulent abodes,O Superstition! hence the dire disease(Balanc'd with which the fam'd Athenian pest
Were a short headach, were the trivial painOf transient indigestion) seiz'd mankind.Long time she rag'd, and scarce a southern galeWarm'd our chill air, unloaded with the threatsOf tyrant Rome; but futile all, till she,Rome's abler legate, magnify'd their pow'r,And in a thousand horrid forms attir'd.Where then was truth to sanctify the pageOf British annals? if a foe expir'd,The perjur'd monk suborn'd infernal shrieksAnd fiends to snatch at the departing soulWith hellish emulation: if a friend,High o'er his roof exultant angels tuneTheir golden lyres, and waft him to the skies.What then were vows, were oaths, were plighted faith?The sovereign's just, the subject's loyal pact,To cherish mutual good, annull'd and vain,By Roman magic, grew an idle scrollEre the frail sanction of the wax was cold.With thee, PlantagenetHenry II.! from civil broilsThe land a while respir'd, and all was peace.Then Becket rose, and, impotent of mind,From regal courts with lawless fury march'dThe church's blood-stain'd convicts, and forgave,Bid murd'rous priests the sov'reign frown contemn,And with unhallow'd crosier bruis'd the crown.Yet yielded not supinely tame a prince
Of Henry's virtues; learn'd, courageous, wise,Of fair ambition. Long his regal soul,Firm and erect, the peevish priest exil'd,And brav'd the fury of revengeful Rome.In vain! let one faint malady diffuseThe pensive gloom which Superstition loves,And see him, dwindled to a recreant groom,Rein the proud palfrey while the priest ascends!Was Coeur-de-LionRichard I. bless'd with whiter days?Here the cowl'd zealots with united criesUrg'd the crusade; and see! of half his storesDespoil'd the wretch whose wiser bosom choseTo bless his friends, his race, his native land:Of ten fair suns that roll'd their annual race,Not one beheld him on his vacant throne;While haughty LongchampBishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor., 'mid his liv'ry'd filesOf wanton vassals, spoil'd his faithful realm,Battling in foreign fields; collecting wideA laurel harvest for a pillag'd land.Oh! dear-bought trophies! when a prince desertsHis drooping realm to pluck the barren sprays!When faithless John usurp'd the sully'd crown,What ample tyranny! the groaning landDeem'd earth, deem'd heav'n, its soe! Six tedious yearsOur helpless fathers in despair obey'dThe papal interdict; and who obey'dThe sov'reign plunder'd. O inglorious days!When the French tyrant, by the futile grant
Of papal rescript, claim'd Britannia's throne,And durst invade: be such inglorious daysOr hence forgot, or not recall'd in vain!Scarce had the tortur'd ear, dejected, heardRome's loud anathema but heartless, deadTo ev'ry purpose, men nor wish'd to liveNor dar'd to die. The poor laborious hindHeard the dire curse, and from his trembling handFell the neglected crook that rul'd the plain;Thence journeying home, in ev'ry cloud he seesA vengeful angel, in whose waving scrollHe reads damnation: sees its sable trainOf grim attendants pencil'd by Despair!The weary pilgrim from remoter climesBy painful steps arriv'd, his home, his friends,His offspring left, to lavish on the shrineOf some far-honour'd saint his costly stores,Inverts his footstep, sickens at the sightOf the barr'd fane, and silent sheds his tear.The wretch, whose hope by stern Oppression chas'dFrom ev'ry earthly bliss, still as it sawTriumphant wrong, took wing and flew to heav'n,And rested there, now mourn'd his refuge lostAnd wonted peace. The sacred fane was barr'd,And the lone altar, where the mourners throng'dTo supplicate remission, smok'd no more;While the green weed, luxuriant round uprose.Some from their deathbed, whose delirious faith
Thro' ev'ry stage of life to Rome's decreesObsequious, humbly hop'd to die in peace,Now saw the ghastly king approach, begirtIn tenfold terrors; now expiring heardThe last loud clarion sound, and Heav'n's decreeWith unremitting vengeance bar the skies.Nor light the grief, by Superstition weigh'd,That their dishonour'd corse, shut from the vergeOf hallow'd earth, or tutelary fane,Must sleep with brutes, their vassals, on the field,Unneath some path, in marle unexorcis'd!No solemn bell extort a neighbour's tear!No tongue of priest pronounce their soul secure,Nor fondest friend assure their peace obtain'd!The priest, alas! so boundless was the ill!He, like the flock he pillag'd, pin'd forlorn;The vivid vermeil fled his fady cheek,And his big paunch, distended with the spoilsOf half his flock, emaciate, groan'd beneathSuperior pride and mightier lust of pow'r!'Twas now Rome's fondest friend, whose meagre handTold to the midnight lamp his holy beadsWith nice precision, felt the deeper wound,As his gull'd soul rever'd the conclave more.Whom did the ruin spare? for wealth, for pow'r,Birth, honour, virtue, enemy, and friend,Sunk helpless, in the dreary gulf involv'd,And one capricious curse envelop'd all!Were kings secure: in tow'ring stations born,In flatt'ry nurs'd, inur'd to scorn mankind,Or view diminish'd from their site sublime;As when a shepherd, from the lofty browOf some proud cliff surveys his less'ning flockIn snowy groups diffusive scud the vale.A while the furious menace John return'd,And breath'd defiance loud. Alas! too soonAllegiance, sick'ning, saw its sov'reign yieldAn angry prey to scruples not his own.The loyal soldier, girt around with strength,Who stole from mirth and wine his blooming years,And seiz'd the fauchion, resolute to guardHis sovereign's right, impalsy'd at the news,Finds the firm bias of his soul revers'dFor foul desertion, drops the lifted steel,And quits Fame's noble harvest, to expireThe death of monks, of surfeit and of sloth!At length, fatigu'd with wrongs, the servile kingDrain'd from his land its small remaining storesTo buy remission. But could these obtain?No! resolute in wrongs the priest obdur'd,Till crawling base to Rome's deputed slaveHis fame, his people, and his crown, he gave.Mean monarch! slighted, brav'd, abhorr'd, before!And now, appeas'd by delegated sway,The wily pontiff scorns not to recallHis interdictions. Now the sacred doors
Admit repentant multitudes, prepar'dTo buy deceit; admit obsequious tribesOf satraps! princes! crawling to the shrineOf sainted villany! the pompous tombDazzling with gems and gold, or in a cloudOf incense wreath'd, amidst a drooping landThat sigh'd for bread! 'Tis thus the Indian cloveDisplays its verdant leaf, its crimson flow'r,And sheds its odours, while the flocks around,Hungry and faint, the barren sands exploreIn vain! nor plant nor herb endears the soil,Drain'd and exhaust to swell its thirsty pores,And furnish luxury—Yet, yet in vainBritannia strove: and whether artful RomeCaress'd or curs'd her, Superstition rag'd,And blinded, fetter'd, and despoil'd, the land.At length some murd'rous monk, with pois'nousExpell'd the life his brethren robb'd of peace.Nor yet surceas'd with John's disastrous fate art,Pontific fury: English wealth exhaust,The sequent reignHenry III. who cancelled the Magna Charta. beheld the beggar'd shoreGrim with Italian usurers, prepar'dTo lend, for griping unexampled hire,To lend—what Rome might pillage uncontroll'd.For now with more extensive havoc rag'dRelentless Greg'ry, with a thousand arts,And each rapacious, born to drain the world!Nor shall the Muse repeat how oft' he blew
The croise's trumpet; then for sums of goldAnnull'd the vow, and bade the false alarmSwell the gross hoards of Henry or his own:Nor shall she tell how pontiffs dar'd repealThe best of charters! dar'd absolve the tieIf British kings, by legal oath restrain'd:Nor can she dwell on argosies of goldFrom Albion's realm to servile shores convey'd,Wrung from her sons, and speeded by her kings!Oh, irksome days! when wicked thrones combineWith papal craft to gull their native land!Such was our fate while Rome's director, taughtOf subjects born to be their monarch's prey,To toil for monks, for gluttony to toil,For vacant gluttony; extortion, fraud,For av'rice, envy, pride, revenge, and shame!O doctrine breath'd from Stygian caves! exhal'dFrom inmost Erebus!—Such Henry's reign!Urging his loyal realm's reluctant handTo wield the peaceful sword, by John erewhileForc'd from its scabbard, and with burnish'd lanceEssay the savage cure, domestic war!And now some nobler spirits chas'd the mistOf gen'ral darkness. GrostedBishop of Lincoln, called Malleus Romanorum. now adorn'dThe mitred wreath he wore, with Reason's swordStagg'ring Delusion's frauds; at length beneathRome's interdict expiring calm, resign'd
No vulgar soul, that dar'd to Heav'n appeal!But, ah! this fertile glebe, this fair domain,Had well nigh ceded to the slothful handsOf monks libidinous, ere Edward's careThe lavish hand of deathbed Fear restrain'd.Yet was he clear of Superstition's taint?He, too, misdeemful of his wholesome law,Ev'n he, expiring, gave his treasur'd goldTo fatten monks on Salem's distant soil!Yes, the Third Edward's breast, to papal swaySo little prone, and fierce in honour's cause,Could Superstition quell! before the tow'rsOf haggard Paris, at the thunder's voiceHe drops the sword, and signs ignoble peace!But still the Night, by Romish art diffus'd,Collects her clouds, and with slow pace recedes;When, by soft Bourdeau's braver queen approv'd,Bold Wickliff rose; and while the bigot pow'rAmidst her native darkness skulk'd secure,The demon vanish'd as he spread the day.So from his bosom Cacus breath'd of oldThe pitchy cloud, and in a night of smokeSecure, a while his recreant life sustain'd,Till fam'd Alcides, o'er his subtlest wilesVictorious, cheer'd the ravag'd nations round.Hail, honour'd Wickliff! enterprising age!An Epicurus in the cause of truth!For 'tis not radiant suns, the jovial hours
Of youthful spring, an ether all serene,Nor all the verdure of Campania's vales,Can chase religious gloom! 'Tis reason, thought,The light, the radiance, that pervades the soul,And sheds its beams on heav'n's mysterious way!As yet this light but glimmer'd, and againError prevail'd; while kings, by force uprais'd,Let loose the rage of bigots on their foes,And seek affection by the dreadful boonOf licens'd murder. Ev'n the kindest prince,The most extended breast, the royal Hal!All unrelenting heard the Lollards' cryBurst from the centre of remorseless flames;Their shrieks endur'd! O stain to martial praise!When Cobham, gen'rous as the noble peerThat wears his honours, paid the fatal priceOf virtue blooming ere the storms were laid!'Twas thus, alternate, truth's precarious flameDecay'd or flourish'd. With malignant eyeThe pontiff saw Britannia's golden fleece,Once all his own, invest her worthier sons!Her verdant vallies and her fertile plains,Yellow with grain, abjure his hateful sway!Essay'd his utmost art, and inly own'dNo labours bore proportion to the prize.So when the tempter view'd, with envious eye,The first fair pattern of the female frame,All Nature's beauties in one form display'd,
And centring there, in wild amaze he stood;Then only envying Heav'n's creative hand,Wish'd to his gloomy reign his envious artsMight win this prize, and doubled ev'ry snare.And vain were reason, courage, learning, all,Till pow'r accede; till Tudor's wild capriceSmile on their cause; Tudor! whose tyrant reignWith mental freedom crown'd, the best of kingsMight envious view, and ill prefer their own!Then Wolsey rose, by Nature form'd to seekAmbition's trophies, by address to win,By temper to enjoy—whose humbler birthTaught the gay scenes of pomp to dazzle more.Then from its tow'ring height with horrid soundRush'd the proud Abbey: then the vaulted roofs,Torn from their walls, disclos'd the wanton sceneOf monkish chastity! Each angry friarCrawl'd from his bedded strumpet, mutt'ring lowAn ineffectual curse. The pervious nooksThat, ages past, convey'd the guileful priestTo play some image on the gaping crowdImbibe the novel day-light, and expose,Obvious, the fraudful engin'ry of Rome.As tho' this op'ning earth to nether realmsShould flash meridian day, the hooded raceShudder, abash'd to find their cheats display'd,And, conscious of their guilt, and pleas'd to waveIts fearful meed, resign'd their fair domain.Nor yet supine, nor void of rage, retir'dThe pest gigantic, whose revengeful strokeTing'd the red annals of Maria's reign,When from the tend'rest breast each wayward priestCould banish mercy and implant a fiend!When Cruelty the fun'ral pyre uprear'd,And bound Religion there, and fir'd the base!When the same blaze, which on each tortur'd limbFed with luxuriant rage, in ev'ry faceTriumphant faith appear'd, and smiling hope.O bless'd Eliza! from thy piercing beamForth flew this hated fiend, the child of Rome;Driv'n to the verge of Albion, linger'd there,Then with her James receding, cast behindOne angry frown, and sought more servile climes.Henceforth they ply'd the long-continued taskOf righteous havoc, cov'ring distant fieldsWith the wrought remnants of the shatter'd pile,While thro' the land the musing pilgrim seesA tract of brighter green, and in the midstAppears a mould'ring wall, with ivy crown'd,Or Gothic turret, pride of ancient days!Now but of use to grace a rural scene,To bound our vistas, and to glad the sonsOf George's reign, reserv'd for fairer times!LOVE AND HONOUR.Sed neque Medorum silvae, ditissima terraNec pulcher Ganges, atque auro turbidus Haemus,Laudibus Angligenum certent; non Bactra, nec Indi,Totaque turriferis Panchaia pinguis arenis.IMITATION.Yet let not Median woods (abundant tract!)Nor GangesGanges—the greatest river, which divides the Indies in two parts. fair, nor HaemusHaemus—an high mountain, dividing Thrace and Thessaly., miser-like,Proud of his hoarded gold, presume to vyeWith Britain's boast and praise; nor Persian BactraBactra—the Bactrians, provincials of Persia.,Nor India's coasts, nor all Panchaia'sPanchaia—a country of Arabia Felix, fruitful in frankincense and various spices; remarkable also for its many towers and lofty buildings. sands,Rich, and exulting in their lofty towers.LET the green olive glad Hesperian shores;Her tawny citron and her orange groves,These let Iberia boast; but if in vainTo win the stranger plant's diffusive smileThe Briton labours, yet our native minds,Our constant bosoms, these the dazzled worldMay view with envy; these Iberian damesSurvey with fix'd esteem and fond desire.Hapless Elvira! thy disastrous fateMay well this truth explain, nor ill adorn
The British lyre; then chiefly, if the Muse,Nor vain nor partial, from the simple guiseOf ancient record catch the pensive lay,And in less grov'lling accents give to fame.Elvira! loveliest maid! th' Iberian realmCould boast no purer breast, no sprightlier mind,No race more splendent, and no form so fair.Such was the chance of war, this peerless maid,In life's luxuriant bloom, enrich'd the spoilOf British victors, vict'ry's noblest pride!She, she alone, amid the wailful trainOf captive maids, assign'd to Henry's care,Lord of her life, her fortune, and her fame!He, gen'rous youth! with no penurious handThe tedious moments that unjoyous rollWhere Freedom's cheerful radiance shines no moreEssay'd to soften; conscious of the pangThat Beauty feels, to waste its fleeting hoursIn some dim fort, by foreign rule restrain'd,Far from the haunts of men or eye of day!Sometimes, to cheat her bosom of its cares,Her kind protector number'd o'er the toilsHimself had worn; the frowns of angry seas,Or hostile rage, or faithless friend, more fellThan storm or foe; if haply she might findHer cares diminish'd; fruitless, fond essay!Now to her lovely hand, with modest awe,The tender lute he gave; she, not averse,
Nor destitute of skill, with willing handCall'd forth angelic strains; the sacred debtOf gratitude, she said, whose just commandsStill might her hand with equal pride obey!Nor to the melting sounds the nymph refus'dHer vocal art; harmonious as the strainOf some imprison'd lark, who, daily cheer'dBy guardian cares, repays them with a song,Nor droops, nor deems sweet liberty resign'd.The song, not artless, had she fram'd to paintDisastrous passion; how, by tyrant lawsOf idiot custom sway'd, some soft-ey'd fairLov'd only one, nor dar'd that love reveal!How the soft anguish banish'd from her cheekThe damask rose full-blown; a fever came,And from her bosom forc'd the plaintive tale;Then, swift as light, he sought the love-lorn maid,But vainly sought her, torn by swifter fateTo join the tenants of the myrtle shade,Love's mournful victims on the plains below.Sometimes, as Fancy spoke the pleasing task,She taught her artful needle to displayThe various pride of spring; then swift upsprungThickets of myrtle, eglantine, and rose:There might you see, on gentle toils intent,A train of busy Loves; some pluck the flow'r,Some twine the garland, some with grave grimaceAround a vacant warrior cast the wreath.
'Twas paint, 'twas life! and sure to piercing eyesThe warrior's face depictur'd Henry's mien.Now had the gen'rous chief with joy perus'dThe royal scroll, which to their native home,Their ancient rights, uninjur'd, unredeem'd,Restor'd the captives. Forth with rapid hasteTo glad his fair Elvira's ear he sprung,Fir'd by the bliss he panted to convey;But fir'd in vain! Ah! what was his amaze,His fond distress, when o'er her pallid faceDejection reign'd, and from her lifeless handDown dropt the myrtle's fair unfinish'd flow'r!Speechless she stood; at length with accents faint," Well may my native shore," she said, "resound" Thy monarch's praise; and ere Elvira prove" Of thine forgetful, flow'rs shall cease to feel" The fost'ring breeze, and Nature change her laws!"And now the grateful edict wide alarm'dThe British host. Around the smiling youths,Call'd to their native scenes, with willing hasteTheir fleet unmoor, impatient of the loveThat weds each bosom to its native soil.The patriot passion! strong in ev'ry clime,How justly their who find no foreign sweetsTo dissipate their loves or match their own.Not so Elvira! she, disastrous maid!Was doubly captive; pow'r nor chance could looseThe subtle bands; she lov'd her gen'rous foe;
She, where her Henry dwelt, her Henry smil'd,Could term her native shore; her native shoreBy him deserted, some unfriendly strand,Strange, bleak, forlorn! a desert waste and wild.The fleet careen'd, the wind propitious fill'dThe swelling sails, the glitt'ring transports wav'dTheir pennants gay, and halcyons' azure wing,With flight auspicious, skimm'd the placid main.On her lone couch in tears Elvira lay,And chid th' officious wind, the tempting sea,And wish'd a storm as merciless as toreHer lab'ring bosom. Fondly now she stroveTo banish passion; now the vassal days,The captive moments, that so smoothly past,By many an art recall'd; now from her luteWith trembling fingers call'd the fav'rite soundsWhich Henry deign'd to praise; and now essay'd,With mimic chains of silken fillets wove,To paint her captive state; if any fraudMight to her love the pleasing scenes prolong,And with the dear idea feast the soul.But now the chief return'd, prepar'd to launchOn Ocean's willing breast, and bid adieuTo his fair pris'ner. She, soon as she heardHis hated errand, now no more conceal'dThe raging flame, but with a spreading blushAnd rising sigh the latent pang disclos'd." Yes, gen'rous youth! I see thy bosom glow
" With virtuous transport, that the task is thine" To solve my chains, and to my weeping friends," And ev'ry longing relative, restore" A soft-ey'd maid, a mild offenceless prey!" But know, my Soldier! never youthful mind," Torn from the lavish joys of wild expense" By him he loath'd, and in a dungeon bound" To languish out his bloom, could match the pains" This ill-starr'd freedom gives my tortur'd mind." What call I freedom? is it that these limbs," From rigid bolts secure, may wander far" From him I love? Alas! ere I may boast" That sacred blessing, some superior pow'r" To mortal kings, to sublunary thrones," Must loose my passion, must unchain my soul:" Ev'n that I loathe; all liberty I loathe!" But most the joyless privilege to gaze" With cold indiff'rence where desert is love." True, I was born an alien to those eyes" I ask alone to please; my fortune's crime!" And, ah! this flatter'd form, by dress endear'd" To Spanish eyes, by dress may thine offend," Whilst I, ill-fated maid! ordain'd to strive" With custom's load beneath its weight expire." Yet Henry's beauties knew in foreign garb" To vanquish me; his form, howe'er disguis'd," To me were fatal! no fantastic robe" That e'er Caprice invented, Custom wore," Or Folly smil'd on, could eclipse thy charms." Perhaps by birth decreed, by Fortune plac'd" Thy country's foe, Elvira's warmest plea" Seems but the subtler accent fraud inspires;" My tend'rest glances but the specious flow'rs," That shade the viper while she plots her wound." And can the trembling candidate of love" Awake thy fears? and can a female breast," By ties of grateful duty bound, ensnare?" Is there no brighter mien, no softer smile" For Love to wear, to dark Deceit unknown?" Heav'n search my soul! and if thro' all its cells" Lurk the pernicious drop of pois'nous guile," Full on my senceless head its phial'd wrath" May Fate exhaust, and for my happiest hour" Exalt the vengeance I prepare for thee!" Ah me! nor Henry's nor his country's foe," On thee I gaz'd, and Reason soon dispell'd" Dim Error's gloom, and to thy favour'd isle" Assign'd its total merit, unrestrain'd." Oh! lovely region to the candid eye!" 'Twas there my fancy saw the Virtues dwell," The Loves, the Graces, play, and bless'd the soil" That nurtur'd thee! for sure the Virtues form'd" Thy gen'rous breast, the Loves, the Graces, plann'd" Thy shapely limbs. Relation, birth, essay'd" Their partial pow'r in vain; again I gaz'd," And Albion's isle appear'd, amidst a tract
" Of savage wastes, the darling of the skies!" And thou by Nature form'd, by Fate assign'd," To paint the genius of thy native shore." 'Tis true, with flow'rs, with many a dazzling scene" Of burnish'd plants, to lure a female eye," Iberia glows; but, ah! the genial sun" That gilds the lemon's fruit, or scents the flow'r," On Spanish minds, a nation's nobler boast!" Beams forth ungentle influences. There" Sits Jealousy enthron'd, and at each ray" Exultant lights his slow-consuming fires." Not such thy charming region; long before" My sweet experience taught me to decide" Of English worth, the sound had pleas'd mine ear." Is there that savage coast, that rude sojourn," Stranger to British worth? the worth which forms" The kindest friends; the most tremendous foes;" First, best supports of liberty and love!" No, let subjected India, while she throws" O'er Spanish deeds the veil, your praise resound." Long as I heard, or ere in story read" Of English fame, my bias'd partial breast" Wish'd them success; and happiest she, I cry'd," Of women happiest she, who shares the love," The fame, the virtues, of an English lord." And now, what shall I say? Bless'd be the hour" Your fair-built vessels touch'd th' Iberian shores:" Bless'd, did I say, the time? if I may bless
" That lov'd event, let Henry's smiles declare." Our hearts and cities won, will Henry's youth" Forego its nobler conquest? will he slight" The soft endearments of the lovelier spoil?" And yet Iberia's sons, with ev'ry vow" Of lasting faith, have sworn these humble charms" Were not excell'd; the source of all their pains," And love her just desert, who sues for love," But sues to thee, while natives sigh in vain." Perhaps in Henry's eye (for vulgar minds" Dissent from his) it spreads an hateful stain" On honest Fame amid his train to bear" A female friend. Then learn, my gentle youth!" Not Love himself, with all the pointed pains" That store his quiver, shall seduce my soul" From honour's laws. Elvira once deny'd" A consort's name, more swift than lightning flies" When elements discordant vex the sky," Shall, blushing, from the form she loves retire." Yet if the specious wish the vulgar voice" Has titled Prudence, sways a soul like thine," In gems or gold what proud Iberian dame" Eclipses me? Nor paint the dreary storms" Or hair-breadth 'scapes that haunt the boundless" And force from tender eyes the silent tear;" When Mem'ry to the pensive maid suggests deep," In full contrast the safe domestic scene" For these resign'd. Beyond the frantic rage
" Of conqu'ring heroes brave, the female mind," When steel'd by love, in Love's most horrid way" Beholds not danger, or, beholding, scorns." Heav'n take my life, but let it crown my love!"She ceas'd, and ere his words her fate decreed,Impatient, watch'd the language of his eye:There Pity dwelt, and from its tender sphereSent looks of love, and faithless hopes inspir'd." Forgive me, gen'rous maid!" the youth return'd," If by thy accents charm'd, thus long I bore" To let such sweetness plead, alas! in vain!" Thy virtue merits more than crowns can yield" Of solid bliss, or happiest love bestow:" But ere from native shores I plough'd the main," To one dear maid, by virtue and by charms" Alone endear'd, my plighted vows I gave," To guard my faith, whatever chance should wait" My warring sword: if conquest, fame, and spoil," Grac'd my return, before her feet to pour" The glitt'ring treasure, and the laurel wreath," Enjoying conquest then, and fame and spoil:" If Fortune frown'd adverse, and Death forbade" The blissful union, with my latest breath" To dwell on Medway's and Maria's name." This ardent vow deep-rooted, from my soul" No dangers tore; this vow my bosom fir'd" To conquer danger, and the spoil enjoy." Her shall I leave, with fair events elate,
" Who crown'd mine humblest fortune with her love?" Her shall I leave, who now, perchance, alone" Climbs the proud cliff, and chides my slow return?" And shall that vessel, whose approaching sails" Shall swell her breast with ecstasies, convey" Death to her hopes, and anguish to her soul?" No! may the deep my villain corse devour," If all the wealth Iberian mines conceal," If all the charms Iberian maids disclose," If thine, Elvira, thine, uniting all!" Thus far prevail—nor can thy virtuous breast" Demand what honour, faith, and love, denies."" Oh! happy she," rejoin'd the pensive maid," Who shares thy fame, thy virtue, and thy love!" And be she happy! thy distinguish'd choice" Declares her worth, and vindicates her claim." Farewell my luckless hopes! my flatt'ring dreams" Of rapt'rous days! my guilty suit, farewell!" Yet fond howe'er my plea, or deep the wound" That waits my fame, let not the random shaft" Of Censure pieree with me th' Iberian dames;" They love with caution, and with happier stars." And, oh! by pity mov'd, restrain the taunts" Of levity, nor brand Elvira's flame;" By merit rais'd, by gratitude approv'd," By hope confirm'd, with artless truth reveal'd," Let, let me say, but for one matchles maid" Of happier birth, with mutual ardour crown'd" These radiant gems, which burnish Happiness," But mock Misfortune, to thy fav'rite's hand" With care convey; and well may such adorn" Her cheerful front, who finds in thee alone" The source of ev'ry transport, but disgrace" My pensive breast, which, doom'd to lasting woe," In thee the source of ev'ry bliss resign." And now, farewell, thou darling youth! the gem" Of English merit! Peace, content, and joy," And tender hopes, and young desires, farewell!" Attend, ye smiling Train! this gallant mind" Back to his native shores; there sweetly smooth" His ev'ning pillow, dance around his groves," And where he treads with vi'lets paint his way:" But leave Elvira! leave her, now no more" Your frail companion! in the sacred cells" Of some lone cloister let me shroud my shame;" There to the matin bell, obsequious, pour" My constant orisons. The wanton Loves" And gay Desires shall spy the glimm'ring tow'rs," And wing their flight aloof: but rest confirm'd," That never shall Elvira's tongue conclude" Her shortest pray'r ere Henry's dear success" The warmest accent of her zeal employ."Thus spoke the weeping fair, whose artless mind,Impartial, scorn'd to model her esteemBy native customs, dress, and face, and air,And manners, less; nor yet resolv'd in vain.
He, bound by prior love, the solemn vowGiv'n and receiv'd, to soft compassion gaveA tender tear; then with that kind adieuEsteem could warrant, weary'd Heav'n with pray'rsTo shield that tender breast he left forlorn.He ceas'd, and to the cloister's pensive sceneElvira shap'd her solitary way.THE SCHOOLMISTRESS. IN IMITATION OF SPENSER.Auditae voces, vagitus et ingens,Infantumque animae flentes in limine primo.VIRG.IMITATION.And mingled sounds and infant plaints we hear,That pierce the entrance shrill, and wound the tender ear.Advertisement. What particulars in Spenser were imagined most proper for the Author's imitation on this occasion are his language, his simplicity, his manner of description, and a peculiar tenderness of sentiment remarkable throughout his works.I.AH me! full sorely is my heart forlorn,To think how modest worth neglected lies,While partial Fame doth with her blasts adornSuch deeds alone as pride and pomp disguise,Deeds of ill sort, and mischievous emprize:Lend me thy clarion, Goddess! let me tryTo sound the praise of Merit ere it dies,Such as I oft' have chaunced to espyLost in the dreary shades of dull obscurity.II.In ev'ry village mark'd with little spire,Embow'r'd in trees, and hardly known to fame,There dwells, in lowly shed and mean attire,A matron old, whom we Schoolmistress name,Who boasts unruly brats with birch to tame;They grieven sore, in piteous durance pent,Aw'd by the pow'r of this relentless dame,And oft-times, on vagaries idly bent,For unkempt hair, or task unconn'd, are sorely shent.III.And all in sight doth rise a birchen tree,Which Learning near her little dome did stowe,Whilom a twig of small regard to see,Tho' now so wide its waving branches flow,And work the simple vassals mickle woe;For not a wind might curl the leaves that blew,But their limbs shudder'd, and their pulse beat low,And as they look'd they found their horror grew,And shap'd it into rods, and tingled at the view.IV.So have I seen (who has not may conceive)A lifeless phantom near a garden plac'd,So doth it wanton birds of peace bereaveOf sport, of song, of pleasure, of repast;They start, they stare, they wheel, they look aghast;Sad servitude! such comfortless annoyMay no bold Briton's riper age e'er taste!N superstition clog his dance of joy,N vision empty, vain, his native bliss destroy.V.Near to this dome is found a patch so green,On which the tribe their gambols do display,And at the door impris'ning board is seen,Lest weakly wights of smaller size should stray,Eager, perdie, to bask in sunny day!The noises intermix'd, which thence resound,Do Learning's little tenement betray,Where sits the dame, disguis'd in look profound,And eyes her Fairy throng, and turns her wheel around.VI.Her cap, far whiter than the driven snowe,Emblem right meet of decency does yield;Her apron dy'd in grain, as blue, I trowe,As is the harebell that adorns the field;And in her hand, for scepter, she does wieldTway birchen sprays, with anxious fear entwin'd,With dark distrust, and sad repentance fill'd,And stedfast hate, and sharp affliction join'd,And fury uncontroul'd, and chastisement unkind.VII.Few but have kenn'd, in semblance meet pourtray'd,The childish faces of old Aeol's train,Libs, Notus, AusterThe south-west wind, south, &c. &c.: these in frowns array'd,How then would fare or earth, or sky, or main,Were the stern god to give his slaves the rein?And were not she rebellious breasts to quell,And were not she her statutes to maintain,The cot no more, I ween, were deem'd the cellWhere comely Peace of Mind, and decent Order dwell.VIII.A russet stole was o'er her shoulders thrown,A russet kirtle fenc'd the nipping air;'Twas simple russet, but it was her own;'Twas her own country bred the flock so fair;'Twas her own labour did the fleece prepare;And, sooth to say, her pupils, rang'd around,Thro' pious awe did term it passing rare,For they in gaping wonderment abound,And think, no doubt, she been the greatest wight on ground.IX.Albeit ne flatt'ry did corrupt her truth,Ne pompous title did debauch her ear,Goody, good-woman, gossip, n'aunt, forsooth,Or dame, the sole additions she did hear;Yet these she challeng'd, these she held right dear;Ne would esteem him act as mought behoveWho should not honour'd eld with these revere;For never title yet so mean could prove,But there was eke a mind which did that title love.X.One ancient hen she took delight to feed,The plodding pattern of the busy dame,Which ever and anon, impell'd by need,Into her school, begirt with chickens, came,Such favour did her past deportment claim;And if neglect had lavish'd on the groundFragment of bread, she would collect the same;For well she knew, and quaintly could expound,What sin it were to waste the smallest crumb she found.XI.Herbs, too, she knew, and well of each could speak,That in her garden sipp'd the silv'ry dew,Where no vain flow'r disclos'd a gaudy streak,But herbs for use, and physic, not a few,Of gray renown, within those borders grew;The tufted basil, pun-provoking thyme,Fresh baum, and marygold of cheerful hue,The lowly gill, that never dares to climb,And more I fain would sing, disdaining here to rhyme.XII.Yet euphrasy may not be left unsung,That gives dim eyes to wander leagues around,And pungent radish, biting infant's tongue,And plantain ribb'd, that heals the reaper's wound,And marj'ram sweet, in shepherd's posie found,And lavender, whose spikes of azure bloomShall be, erewhile, in arid bundles bound,To lurk amidst the labours of her loom,And crown her kerchiefs clean with mickle rare perfume.XIII.And here tri rosemarine, that whilom crown'dThe daintiest garden of the proudest peer,Ere, driv'n from its envy'd site, it foundA sacred shelter for its branches here,Where edg'd with gold its glitt'ring skirts appear.Oh wassel days! O customs meet and well!Ere this was banish'd from its lofty sphere;Simplicity then sought this humble cell,Nor ever would she more with thane and lordling dwell.XIV.Here oft' the dame, on Sabbath's decent eve,Hymned such psalms as Sternhold forth did mete;If winter 'twere, she to her hearth did cleave,But in her garden found a summer-seat:Sweet melody! to hear her then repeatHow Israel's sons, beneath a foreign king,While taunting foe-men did a song entreat,All for the nonce untuning ev'ry string,Uphung their useless lyres—small heart had they to sing.XV.For she was just, and friend to virtuous lore,And pass'd much time in truly virtuous deed;And in those elfins' ears would oft' deploreThe times when Truth by Popish rage did bleed,And tortious death was true Devotion's meed;And simple Faith in iron chains did mourn,That nould on wooden image place her creed;And lawny saints in smould'ring flames did burn:Ah! dearest Lord! forefend thilk days should e'er return.XVI.In elbow chair, like that of Scottish stem,By the sharp tooth of cank'ring Eld defac'd,In which, when he receives his diadem,Our sov'reign prince and liefest liege is plac'd,The matron sate, and some with rank she grac'd,(The source of children's and of courtier's pride!)Redress'd affronts, for vile affronts there pass'd,And warn'd them not the fretful to deride,But love each other dear, whatever them betide.XVII.Right well she knew each temper to descry,To thwart the proud, and the submiss to raise,Some with vile copper prize exalt on high,And some entice with pittance small of praise,And other some with baleful sprig she 'frays:Ev'n absent, she the reins of pow'r doth hold,While with quaint arts the giddy crowd she sways;Forewarn'd, if little bird their pranks behold,'Twill whisper in her ear, and all the scene unfold.XVIII.Lo now with state she utters the command!Eftsoons the urchins to their tasks repair,Their books, of stature small, they take in hand,Which with pellucid horn secured are,To save from finger wet the letters fair;The work so gay, that on their back is seenSt. George's high atchievements does declare,On which thilk wight that has y-gazing beenKens the forthcoming rod, unpleasing sight, I ween!XIX.Ah! luckless he, and born beneath the beamOf evil star! it irks me whilst I write!As erst the bardSpenser. by Mulla's silver stream,Oft' as he told of deadly dolorous plight,Sigh'd as he sung, and did in tears indite;For brandishing the rod, she doth beginTo loose the brogues, the stripling's late delight!And down they drop, appears his dainty skin,Fair as the furry coat of whitest ermilin.XX.O ruthful scene! when from a nook obscureHis little sister doth his peril see;All playful as she sate she grows demure,She finds full soon her wonted spirits flee;She meditates a pray'r to set him free:Nor gentle pardon could this dame deny,(If gentle pardon could with dames agree)To her sad grief that swells in either eye,And wrings her so that all for pity she could die.XXI.No longer can she now her shrieks command,And hardly she forbears, thro' awful fear,To rushen forth, and, with presumptuous hand,To stay harsh justice in its mid career.On thee she calls, on thee, her parent dear!(Ah! too remote to ward the shameful blow!)She sees no kind domestic visage near,And soon a flood of tears begins to flow,And gives a loose at last to unavailing woe.XXII.But, ah! what pen his piteous plight may trace?Or what device his loud laments explain?The form uncouth of his disguised face?The pallid hue that dyes his looks amain?The plenteous show'r that does his cheek distain?When he in abject wise implores the dame,Ne hopeth aught of sweet reprieve to gain,Or when from high she levels well her aim,And thro' the thatch his cries each falling stroke proclaim.XXIII.The other tribe, aghast, with sore dismayAttend, and conn their tasks with mickle care;By turns, astony'd, ev'ry twig survey,And from their fellows' hateful wounds beware,Knowing, I wist, how each the same may share;Till fear has taught them a performance meet,And to the well-known chest the dame repair,Whence oft' with sugar'd cates she doth 'em greet,And gingerbread y-rare, now, certes, doubly sweet!XXIV.See to their seats they hye with merry glee,And in beseemly order sitten there,All but the wight of bum y-galled, heAbhorreth bench, and stool, and fourm, and chair,(This hand in mouth y-fix'd, that rends his hair)And eke with snubs prosound, and heaving breast,Convulsions intermitting! does declareHis grievous wrong, his dame's unjust behest,And scorns her offer'd love, and shuns to be caress'd.XXV.His face besprent, with liquid crystal shines,His blooming face, that seems a purple flow'r,Which low to earth its drooping head declines,All smear'd and sully'd by a vernal show'r.O the hard bosoms of despotic Pow'r!All, all, but she, the author of his shame,All, all, but she, regret this mournful hour;Yet hence the youth, and hence the flow'r shall claim,If so I deem aright, transcending worth and fameXXVI.Behind some door, in melancholy thought,Mindless of food, he, dreary caitiff! pines,Ne for his fellows' joyaunce careth aught,But to the wind all merriment resigns,And deems it shame if he to peace inclines;And many a sullen look askaunce is sent,Which for his dame's annoyance he designs;And still the more to pleasure him she's bent,The more doth he, perverse, her 'haviour past resent.XXVII.Ah me! how much I fear lest pride it be!But if that pride it be, which thus inspires,Beware, ye dames! with nice discernment seeYe quench not, too, the sparks of nobler fires:Ah! better far than all the Muses' lyres,All coward arts, is valour's gen'rous heat;The firm fixt breast which fit and right requires,Like Vernon's patriot soul; more justly greatThan craft that pimps for ill, or flow'ry false deceit.XXVIII.Yet nurs'd with skill, what dazzling fruits appear!Ev'n now sagacious foresight points to showA little bench of heedless bishops here,And there a chancellour in embryo,Or bard sublime, if bard may e'er be so,As Milton, Shakespeare, names that ne'er shall die!Tho' now he crawl along the ground so low,Nor weeting how the Muse should soar on high,Wisheth, poor starv'lling elf! his paper kite may fly.XXIX.And this perhaps, who cens'ring the design,Low lays the house which that of cards doth build,Shall Dennis be! if rigid Fates incline,And many an epic to his rage shall yield,And many a poet quit th'Aonian field;And, sour'd by age, profound he shall appear,As he who now with 'sdainful fury thrill'dSurveys mine work, and levels many a sneer,And furls his wrinkly front, and cries, "What stuff is here?"XXX.But now Dan Phoebus gains the middle skie,And Liberty unbars her prison-door,And like a rushing torrent out they fly,And now the grassy cirque han cover'd o'erWith boist'rous revel-rout and wild uproar;A thousand ways in wanton rings they run,Heav'n shield their short-liv'd pastimes, I implore!For well may freedom, erst so dearly won,Appear to British elf more gladsome than the sun.XXXI.Enjoy, poor imps! enjoy your sportive trade,And chase gay flies, and cull the fairest flow'rs,For when my bones in grass-green sods are laid,For never may ye taste more careless hoursIn knightly castles or in ladies bow'rs.O vain to seek delight in earthly thing!But most in courts, where proud Ambition tow'rs;Deluded wight! who weens fair peace can springBeneath the pompous dome of kesar or of king.XXXII.See in each sprite some various bent appear!These rudely carol most incondite lay;Those saunt'ring on the green, with jocund leerSalute the stranger passing on his way;Some builden fragile tenements of clay,Some to the standing lake their courses bend,With pebbles smooth at duck and drake to play;Thilk to the huxter's sav'ry cottage tend,In pastry kings and queens th' allotted mite to spend.XXXIII.Here, as each season yields a different store,Each season's stores in order ranged been,Apples with cabbage-net y-cover'd o'er,Galling full sore th' unmoney'd wight, are seen,And gooseb'rie, clad in liv'ry red or green;And here of lovely dye the Cath'rine pear,Fine pear! as lovely for thy juice I ween;O may no wight e'er pennyless come there,Lest smit with ardent love he pine with hopeless care!XXXIV.See! cherries here, ere cherries yet abound,With thread so white in tempting posies ty'd,Scatt'ring like blooming maid their glances round,With pamper'd look draw little eyes aside,And must be bought, tho' penury betide;The plum all azure, and the nut all brown,And here, each season, do those cakes abideWhose honour'd names th' inventive city own,Rend'ring thro' Britain's isle Salopia's praises knownShrewsbury cakes..XXXV.Admir'd Salopia! that with venial prideEyes her bright form in Severn's ambient wave,Fam'd for her loyal cares in perils try'd,Her daughters lovely, and her striplings brave:Ah! midst the rest, may flowers adorn his graveWhose art did first these dulcet cates display!A motive fair to Learning's imps he gave,Who cheerless o'er her darkling region stray,Till Reason's morn arise, and light them on their way.CONTENTS.ODES, &c.ODE to Health, 1730, Page 5To a Lady of Quality, fitting up her library, 1738, 8Anacreontic, 1738, 9Ode. Written 1739, 11Upon a visit to a Lady of Quality, in winter 1748, 13Ode to Memory, 1748, 14Verses written towards the close of the year 1748, to William Lyttleton, Esq. 16An irregular Ode, after sickness, 1749, 20Rural Elegance, an Ode to the late Duchess of Somerset, 1750, 25Ode to Indolence, 1750, 37Ode to a young Lady, somewhat too solicitous about her manner of expression, 38Written in a Flower Book of my own colouring, designed for Lady Plymouth, 1753-4, 40The Dying Kid, 41Ode, 43Ode. To be performed by Dr. Brettle, and a chorus of Hales Owen citizens, 45SONGS AND BALLADS.The Princess Elizabeth, A Ballad, alluding to a story recorded of her when she was prisoner at Woodstock, 1554, Page 47Nancy of the Vale. A Ballad, 49The Rape of the Trap. A Ballad, 1737, 52Jemmy Dawson. A Ballad. Written about the time of his execution, in the year 1745, 55A Ballad, 59Song, 60Song. The Landscape, 61Song, 62Song. The Skylark, 63Song, 64Song. The attribute of Venus, 65Song, 1742, 66Song. Valentine's Day, 1743, 67Song, 1743, 68Song, 1744, 69Song, 1744, 70Song, 1744, 71Song. Winter 1746, 72Song. The Scholar's Relapse, 73Song. The Rose-Bud, ib.Song. Daphne's visit, 75Song. Written in a Collection of Bacchanalian Songs, 76Song. Imitated from the French, ib.
Song, Page 77Song, 78The Halcyon, 79MORAL PIECES.The Judgment of Hercules, 81The Progress of Taste: or, The Fate of Delicacy.
Part the First, 100Part the Second, 105Part the Third, 110Part the Fourth, 115Economy, a Rhapsody, addressed to young Poets.
Part the First, 123Part the Second, 133Part the Third, 141The Ruin'd Abbey: or, The Effects of Superstition, 147Love and Honour, 161The Schoolmistress. In imitation of Spenser, 174From the APOLLO PRESS, by the MARTINS, May 23. 1778.THE END.