THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS POPE, FOUNDER OF TRINITY COLLEGE OXFORD. CHIEFLY COMPILED FROM ORIGINAL EVIDENCES.WITH AN APPENDIX OF PAPERS, NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.THE SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.BY THOMAS WARTON, B.D. FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, AND F.S.A.LONDON. PRINTED FOR THOMAS CADELL IN THE STRAND. MDCCLXXX.PREFACE.BIOGRAPHERS, in the pursuit of information, are naturally betrayed into minute researches. The curiosity of the reader is seldom proportioned to that of the writer in this species of composition. Every incident, relating to a favourite character which the mind has long contemplated with attention, acquires importance. On these principles we may venture to found a plausible excuse, for the many trifling discoveries, and intricate discussions of insignificant circumstances, with which personal history so much abounds.To this apology, which every biographer has a right to plead, the writer of the following memoirs presumes he possesses a peculiar

claim, arising from his situation and connections. He describes the life of a person, whom the strongest principles of gratitude, implanted in early years, have habitually taught him to regard with united veneration and affection. Under these circumstances, the slightest events appear interesting; and the most frivolous anecdotes of such a life are investigated with a pleasing enthusiasm.In the mean time, a want of materials might have justly been here alledged, in extenuation of an objection so constantly urged against works of this kind. It will readily be granted, that to record the lives of men who have adorned their country by monuments of munificence, is a tribute indispensably due to public merit, and which cannot without public injustice be witheld. But to discharge this duty even imperfectly, and by those means, however inadequate, which the utmost exertions of diligent enquiry can afford, is less unpardonable than to neglect

it entirely. When we cannot recover a perfect portrait of our friend and our benefactor, we must be contented with a few faint outlines. Abundance only implies rejection; and where but little can be collected, it is necessary to retain every thing. We must acquiesce in anecdotes of inconsiderable consequence, while those of more importance cannot be procured.These inconveniencies might have easily been prevented. But our ancestors had no regard for futurity. They trusted the remembrances of their heroes to chance and tradition; or rather, to the laborious investigation of a distant posterity. For it is the task of modern times to commemorate, if they cannot imitate, the conspicuous examples of antiquity; and to compose the panegyric of those virtues which exist no more. Inquisitive leisure is not the lot of earlier eras. Ages of action are succeeded by ages of enquiry.
But that species of enquiry which properly belongs to the biographer, seems, in point of time, to be posteriour to that which forms the province of the historian. It does not grow fashionable till late: it begins to be the favourite amusement of cultivated nations at their most polished periods. When the more important and extensive stores of historical information have been exhausted, the growing spirit of curiosity, which increases in proportion as it is gratified, still demands new gratifications; it descends to particularities, and delights to develope circumstances of a subordinate nature. After many general histories have been written, inquisitive minds are eager to explore the parts of what they have hitherto surveyed at large. The ardour of research, which gathers strength from contraction, is exerted on distinct periods; and at length personal history commences. Characters before only represented in the gross, and but incidentally exhibited

or superficially displayed, now become the subject of critical disquisition, and a separate examination. Occurences neglected or omitted by the historian, form materials for the biographer: and men of superiour eminence are selected from the common mass of public transactions in which they were indistinctly grouped, and delineated as detatched figures in a single point of view.Nor was it till late after the restoration of literature, that biography assumed its proper form, and appeared in its genuine character. The Lives which were compiled at some distance after that period, are extremely jejune and defective performances. The first which approached to perfection were those of Peireskius, by Peter Gassendus, and of Melancthon, by Camerarius. It was long, before the perseverance of investigation connected with precision, the patient toil of tracing evidences, authenticating facts, and digesting scattered notices, grew into a science: in a

word, before the accuracy of the antiquarian was engrafted on the researches of the biographer. The masterly Life of William of Wykeham will best explain and illustrate these reflections: a work which I chuse to produce as an example on this occasion, not only because it is here produced as an example with a peculiar degree of propriety, but because it is a pattern of that excellence in this mode of writing, which I mean to characterise and recommend.As sir Thomas Pope bore some share in the national transactions of his time, to relieve the dryness of personal and local incidents, I have endeavoured to render these pages in some measure interesting to general readers, by dilating this part of my performance, and by sometimes introducing historical digressions, yet resulting immediately from the tenour of my subject. Amongst these, I flatter myself that my relation of the persecutions of the princess Elizabeth may merit

some attention: of which I have thrown together a more uniform and circumstantial detail than has yet appeared, with the addition of several anecdotes respecting that transaction not hitherto published.On the whole I may venture to affirm, that I have at least attempted to make my work as entertaining as possible. My materials have not always been of the most brilliant kind; but they are such, as have often enabled me to enliven and embellish my narrative by presenting pictures of antient manners, which are ever striking to the imagination.I have before hinted, that my resources for compiling this history were slender and insufficient. From books I could obtain scarce any information. Indeed, my chief assistance has been derived from manuscript authorities. I have not however in this respect found the success I wished. Yet I have carefully consulted every record that seemed

likely to illustrate my subject; and my references will shew, that I have searched a variety of authentic instruments, preserved in the British Museum, the chapel of the Rolls, and other repositories of valuable originals. Of these the more important are printed at large in the Appendix.Among my references to manuscript authorities, two sometimes occur which require explanation. These are, MSS. Cotton. Vitellius, F. 5. MSS. Strype. And, MSS. F. Wise.In the year 1709, that industrious and accurate annalist Mr. John Strype, communicated to doctor Arthur Charlett, master of University college, originally fellow of Trinity college, an account of the Funeral of sir Thomas PopeSee Ballard's Coll. of Letters, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. fol. xv. pag. 31. Letter from Strype to Charlett, dated Lowlayton, Essex, Apr. 20. 1709. See LIFE, infr. p. 178.. This account Strype had transcribed from a manuscript of the

Cotton library, which he perpetually cites in in his ECCLESIASTICAL MEMOIRS, marked Vitellius, F. 5In a letter from Strype to Charlett, dat. ibid. Apr. 5. 1709. MSS. ut supr. vol. xv. p. 31. "The kindness you bear to the foundation of Trinity college, makes me inquisitive into the Founder's place of burial, which you find mentioned in my ANNALS, [p. 3. edit. i.] Though I cannot easily recollect every manuscript and particular place in them whence I have compiled every part of the history. Yet it occurs to me, that sir THOMAS POPE's Funeral, with the time and place, as also the rest of pages 30, 31, [viz.] the funerals in those pages mentioned, were taken from the volume, VITELLIUS F. 5. in the Cotton library, which is a certain brief journal of funeral, and as well of divers other occurrences, beginning at the year 1550, written, as it seems, by some herald, or other diligent observer of his own times. There the writer sets down all the particular ceremonies, the solemnities, and mourners, at that knight's interment. Which if you have any desire to know, I will transcribe out of my notes and send you." This is an original. Then follows the letter before referred to, which is not the original, but a transcript by the late Mr. Rawlins of Pophills in Gloucestershire, who became possessed of Charlett's extensive correspondence. See APPEND. p. 458. infr.. Soon afterwards it appears that Strype sent to Charlett, perhaps at his request, a few other notices relating to sir Thomas Pope, extracted from the same manuscript.

The late learned Mr Francis Wise, keeper of the archives, Radclivian librarian, and fellow of Trinity college, at Oxford, copied all the transcripts, about four or five in number, which Strype on this occasion had made from the Cotton manuscript, by permission of Charlett, among whose curious and numerous papers they were kept; and by Mr. Wise they were thus communicated to me. Fortunately for the present undertaking, the extracts had been made by Strype before the fire happened in the Cotton library, then placed in Ashburnham house at Westminster, by which fatal accident this valuable volume was particularly damaged; and, as far as I can judge from a cursory inspection, most of the leaves, if not all, containing Strype's extracts, were either destroyed or obliteratedBut see APPEND. Numb. xxviii.. The reader is therefore desired to observe, that the reference, viz. MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype, signifies

Strype's transcripts from thenceSee pp. 46. 86. 89. 91.. But whenever this Cotton manuscript is cited without the addition of MSS. Strype, the reader will remember, that such citations were faithfully transcribed by myself from that manuscript volume, now belonging to the British Museum.Mr. Wise also transcribed, and communicated to me, two or three other papers from doctor Charlett's collections, beside those of Strype which I have just mentionedSee pp. 185. 189. And APPEND. Numb. xxix.. These I have called MSS. F. WiseSince my first edition, among the manuscript papers of the Rev. Thomas Wilkes, D.D. fellow of Trinity college, Oxford, and who died rector of Rotherfield Greys in Oxfordshire, in 1745, I have met with other notices by Mr. Wise, which are now first inserted in this edition, and are also styled, MSS. F. Wise. These Mr. Wise seems to have had chiefly from Dr. Charlett's collections, and the family-papers of the late sir Harry Pope-Blount.As to Charlett's collections, I learn that he derived many of his notices and informations on this subject, from Mr. Josiah Howe, a fellow of the college; a short account of whom will not be superfluous, as it may tend to establish their credit. He was born at Crendon in Bucks, and elected Scholar of Trinity college, June 12, 1632. Registr. Coll. fol. 68. b. Admitted Fellow, being then bachelor of Arts, May 26, 1637. Ibid. fol. 72. b. By Hearne he is called, "a very great cavalier and loyaliss, and a most ingenious man." Rob. Glouc. GLOSS. p. 669. He appears to have been a general and an accomplished scholar, and in polite literature esteemed one of the ornaments of the university. In 1644, he preached before king Charles the first at Christ-church cathedral Oxford. The sermon was printed, and in red letters, by the king's special command. Only thirty copies were printed. One was purchased, in 1723, by Hearne from Dr. Charlett's library: the same, and that perhaps the only one extant, which is now among Rawlinson's Books in the Bodleian. See Hearne's MSS. COLL. vol. 102. p. 8. Charlett bought this rarity many years before, at the high price of five shillings. Ibid. vol. 51. p. 176. In 1646, he was created Bachelor of Divinity by decree of the king, among others who were complimented with that degree for having distinguished themselves as preachers before the Court at Oxford. He was soon afterwards ejected from his Fellowship by the presbyterians, but not in the general expulsion in 1648, according to Walker, SUFF. CLERG. p. 134. Being one of the Bursars of the college and foreseeing its fate, having resolved at the same time never to acknowledge the authority of Cromwell's visitors, he retired, in the beginning of the year 1648, to a college-estate in Buckinghamshire, carrying with him many rentals, rolls, papers, and other authentic documents, belonging to his office. He was invited to return to the college by Dr. Harris the new presbyterian President, on a promise, that if he would quietly give up the official books, his submission to the visitors should be dispensed with, and he should be permitted to retain his fellowship without molestation. Harris by this artifice having recovered the books, immediately signed an order for Howe's expulsion; pretending to have received an unexpected injunction from the visitors, and professing his regret at being obliged to remove so valuable a member from the foundation. Hearne, MSS. COLL. vol. 89. p. 195. He was restored to his fellowship in 1660. He has a Copy of recommendatory English verses prefixed to the folio edition of Beaumont and Fletcher, printed in 1647. Another to Thomas Randoph's POEMS, reprinted at Oxford, in 1640. Another to Cartwright's COMEDIES and POEMS, at Oxford, 1651. These pieces in the witty epigrammatic style which then prevailed, have uncommon acuteness, and highly deserve to be revived. Some others have perhaps escaped me. In those I have mentioned, he appears in company with Denham, Waller, Jonson, Corbett, Brome, Shirley, Mayne, and others the most ingenious men of those times, who were of his intimate acquaintance. Wood says that he wrote a copy of Englishe verses, which were much applauded, spoken before the duke and duchess of York, in 1683, at Trinity college. MSS. Mus. Ashmol. fol. 57. D. 19. He lived forty two years, greatly respected, after his restitution, and arriving at the age of ninety, died fellow of the college, where he constantly resided, Aug. 28, 1701. He is interred, under a small marble lozenge, with a short inscription, in the college-chapel. Hearne says, that "he lived so retiredly in the latter part of his life, that he rarely came abroad; so that I could never see him, though I have often much desired to have a sight of him." GLOSS. ut supr. p. 670. Compare Wood, ATH. OXON. ii. f. 56. And LIFE of BATHURST, pp. 154. 211.. Other references

will easily be understood, as care has been taken to give them with equal exactness and perspicuity.
I must not here omit, what I am much honoured in mentioning, that this work

is greatly indebted to the friendship of the bishop of Worcester; who most obligingly condescended to favour me with some valuable communications, from the family papers of his lordship's father, the earl of Guildford.
THE LIFE OF Sir THOMAS POPE.SECT. I.THOMAS POPE was born at Dedington in Oxfordshire, about the year 1508Computed from his age at the year of his death., and at the end of the reign of king Henry the seventh.His parents were William and Margaret PopeE Statut. coll. Trin. Oxon. cap. xiii. "Majestatem tuam oramus, O beata Trinitas, ut animarum Margarete uxoris Fundatoris nostri, et Gulielmi et Margarete parentum ejusdem, &c.", who lived at DedingtonVisitation of Oxfordshire, by Ric. Lee, Portcullis Marshall to Clarencieux King at Arms, A.D. 1570. MSS. in Mus. Ashmol. Oxon. Codd. A. Wood. 4to. 8522. 60. pag. 32.: but the family, which seems at least to have been that

of a gentleman, was originally seated in Kent, before the reign of Edward the thirdEx stemmate Pope, MSS. in rotulo praegrandi pergamen. penes honoratiss. Francisc. com. de Guildford. By which it likewise appears, that the said William Pope was the only son of John, second son of Thomas Pope, and Grace Sampson his wife.. William appears to have been married to a former wife, named Julian EdmondesLee's MS. visitation ut supr. ibid. And MS. pedigree of Pope, manu A. Wood, inter MSS. Rawlins. bibl. Bodl. Compared with evidence occurring hereafter. One John Edmondes of Dedington, is mentioned in Ashmole's Berkshire, who, as I collect, was her uncle. iii. 285. As also in Lee's MSS. ut supr. pag. 41. Her father was probably Robert Edmondes, one of the executors of William Pope's will. Append. Numb. I. John Edmondes is also a subscribing witness to an Instrument, Append. No. XXII. John Edmondes, the elder, is mentioned in an indenture of lands between Sir T. Pope, and Trinity college, Oxon. dat. Jun. 26. 1558. In registr. prim. fol. 20.. His second wife, Margaret, mother of THOMAS POPE, was the daughter of Edmund Yate, of Stanlake in OxfordshireFrom Lee's MS. visitation, ut supr. pag. 51. Compared with pedigr. MSS. Rawlins. According to Lee, Edmund Yate of Stanlake was third son and heir of Richard Yate of Charney, co. Berks. He married Margaret, daughter of John Cornwall of Stanlake. See the pedigree of Yate of Charney, which is not altogether exact, in Ashmole's Berkshire, iii. 321.Wood says, that Margaret Pope, in the text, was the daughter of — Yate of Stanford in Wootton-hundred in Oxfordshire. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 301. But no such place occurs in that hundred. Ashmole, Berks. iii. 295. mentions Yate of Stanford, Berks; which place Wood seems to have confounded with Sandford, a village in Wootton-hundred. Many of the family of Yate appear to have lived in, and about, the villages of Charney, Buckland, and Stanford, Berks, and Stanlake, Oxfordshire; places all of the same neighbourhood. What still further confirms my supposition, that Wood is mistaken, and that the said Edmund Yate, of Stanlake, was Margaret Pope's father, is; that Peter Yate of Stanlake, whom Sir Thomas Pope in a letter, dat. 1557, calls his cousin, appears to have been a tenant to Trinity college, Oxford. In indentur. dat. Jul. 3. 1556. I find likewise one Barthol. Yate, co. Berks, who I presume was of some of the places abovementioned, or from that neighbourhood, elected scholar of the said college, in 1569. Ex registr. prim. dicti coll. fol. 34. But it would be needless, end trifling, to multiply proofs.: and after the death of

William Pope, she was again married, to John Bustarde of Adderbury in the same countyEx epitaph. infra citat.. Beside the abovementioned THOMAS, the principal subject of these papers, the said William and Margaret had one son, John; and three daughters, Elisabeth, Julian, and AliceLee's MSS. visitat. ut supr. 32. And from evidences occurring hereafter.: concerning all which I shall speak more at large hereafter.William and Margaret Pope seem to have lived in a decent and creditable condition, as may be collected from the bequests of William's will; which also partly shews the circumstances in which his eldestSee Append. I. son was left. He bequeathes his land to be divided between

his wife and his son THOMASI find that Sir Thomas Pope sold the manor of Dedington, with other possessions in the neighbourhood, to K. Henry viii. by indent. dat. Mar. 21. an. reg. 36. But the premisses were no-paternal estate of the Popes; having been granted to Sir Thomas Pope, but a few years before, as parcel of the priory of Bicester, viz. Pat. 28. Hen. viii. Test. Feb. 11. par. 5.: one hundred pounds to the said THOMAS, and forty pounds to each daughter: a stipend to a priest to sing for his soul one year in the church of Dedington, in which he directs his body to be buried: three shillings and four-pence, respectively, to the torches, the bells, Saint Thomas's beam, and our Lady's beam, in the said church: six shillings and four-pence to Clifton chapel near Dedington: three shillings and four-pence to the mother church of Lincoln; and to each of his god-children a sheep. He died in the year 1523From the probate of his will, Append. No. I.. By an inquisition taken after his death, it appears, that he possessed estates, at Whitehill and Hooknorton in Oxfordshire, of the yearly value of six poundsSee Append. No. *XII.*. Margaret has wife survived him many years, and died on the twenty-fifth day of August, 1557She is buried in the chancel of Wroxton church, with this epitaph on a brass plate: 
Here lyeth under this stone buryed Margart Bustarde, widowe, sometyme the wif of William Pope of Dedington in the county of Oxford, Gent. and afterward married to John Bustarde, Gent. dwellinge at Atterbury in the said county: which William and Margaret were father and mother to Sir Thomas Pope Knight, and John Pope, Esquire. And the said Margaret departed out of this worlde the xxv day of August an. dni. 1557, and hopeth to ryse and lyve agayne with Christe eternally., at Wroxton, in Oxfordshire,

where she seems to have lived during the latter part of her life with her younger son, JohnEx indentura quadam quadripartit. in Thesauriario Coll. Trin. Oxon.; her second husband, John Bustarde, dying in the year 1534From his monument at Adderbury, Co. Oxon. See Append. No. XXVI..Their son THOMAS received the first rudiments of grammatical learning at the public school of the neighbouring town of Banbury; at that time a celebrated school, and kept by Thomas Stanbridge of Ma dalen college in Oxford, an eminent instructor of youthHe died 1522. Wood Ath. Oxon. Vol. 1. f. p. 26. col. 2. Ed. ii. and p. 18. col. 1, brother of John Stanbridge, who compiled a famous grammar, called Stanbridge-grammarHugh Oldham, Bishop of Exeter, about the year 1518, founded a school at Manchester, and appointed the masters to teach grammar after the use, manner, and form, of the school at Banbury in Oxfordshire; where Thomas Stanbridge taught the grammar composed by John Stanbridge. ibid. Oxford Bishops, p. 658. col. 1. And Wood's School-Notes, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. 8518, 56. Manchester..

From hence he was removed to Eton collegeFor this we have his own testimony, in the statutes of his college at Oxford. "Ex scholis Etonensi, vel Banburiensi, in quibus Ipse olim in grammaticae rudimentis educatus eram." Cap. vii.: but I do not find that he completed his education at either of our universities.It seems most probable, that he was immediately sent from Eton school to some of the inns of court. I believe, to Gray's-inn. That he was bred to the law is certain; and there is undoubted evidence that he was employed, while very young, in some of the inferior offices of the court of chanceryApud Lit. pat. Hen. vii. an reg. 29. inf. citat. viz. "Grandes labores, laudabiliaque obsequia, quae dilectus nobis THOMAS POPE, attendens negociis nostris in Cancellaria nostra predicta multipliciter impendebat, indiesque impendere intendebat, merito contemplantes, &c." See Append. No. V.. And that he was originally destined, and regularly trained, to this profession, may be conjectured from his hand-writing; many specimens of which remain in his college at Oxford. Nor is it improbable, that he might be placed in his youth, for some time at least, under the superintendence and instruction of some skilful practitioner in the law, perhaps a master in chancery; as in his will he bequeathes to his old master's son, master CrokeOne Richard Croke is made comptroller and supervisor of the hanaper, in 1529, with a yearly fee of x. l. Bill. signat. Hen. viii. anno reg. 20. Sep. 19. He has also more grants in the law, under other years of the same king., his black sattin

gown faced with Luserne-spotsThe spotted fur of a Russian animal, called a Lucern, antiently much in use and esteem. I find it mentioned in the will of Sir John Wallop, an eminent captain and statesman in the reign of Henry viii. May 22. 1551. "To the Sergeant of the kinges herthoundes my gowne furrid with lucernes." Registr. Buck. qu. 24. cur. Praer. Cant. It is specified in our ancient statutes. See the word in Beaumont and Fletcher, vol. ii. p. 399.. This Croke or Crooke, his supposed Master, seems to have been the chief of the six clerks in chancery who was ordered by Sir Thomas More, for the satisfaction of the judges, and his own justification, to make a docquet of all the Injunctions which he had given to the law courts during the time of his chancellorshipMore's Life, by M. T. M. p. 218. 4to..But whatever was our young adventurer's situation in early life, it is remarkable that a person of his obscure family and inconsiderable fortune, should so soon recommend himself to public notice, and gain access even to the royal favour. Vigorous abilities, and an active mind, easily surmounted all obstacles; and he quickly became a successful candidate in the pursuit of riches and honour.
What was the first step to his advancement in life, and whether it arose from the friendship of some private patron, from any distinguished merit in his profession, a peculiar cast for business in general, or a lucky concurrence of all these causes, cannot be precisely determined, although from what follows it may be partly conjectured. He was not much more than twenty-seven years of age, when he had sufficient address or interest to procure an appointment to offices, which seem to have been alternately bestowed upon Henry's most eminent favourites, and the most popular characters of those timesFuller in his quaint manner, observes concerning him, "I behold him as fortunae suae fabrum; the smith, who by God's blessing, hammered out his own fortune without any patrimonial advantage." Worthies of England, Article London, p. 223. edit. 1662..Having been early initiated, as I before observed, in the business of chancery, on the fifth day October, 1533, he was constituted by letters patent of Henry the eighth, clerk of the briefs in the star-chamber at WestminsterSee Append. No. IV., On the fifteenth day of October in the same year, he received by letters patent of the same king, a reversionary grant of the office of clerk

of the crown in chancery. Of this post, very soon afterwards, he became actually possessed; with an annual fee of twenty pounds from the hanaper, and also a robe with fur at the feasts of Christmas and Pentecost from the king's great wardrobePat. 29. Hen. viii. par. 5. See Append. No. V..On the thirteenth day of November 1535, he was constituted, by the king's letters patent, warden of the mint, exchange, and coinage, in the tower of London, on the voluntary resignation, in his favour, of John Coppynger, page of the great wardrobePat. 26. Hen. viii. par. 2. See Append. No. III. See more of John Coppynger, ibid. in the Notes.. How long he continued in this office I have not learned. It seems, however, that he had quitted it within eight years, and, as I suppose, for some more valuable considerationFor in the British Museum, there is, "Compotus Johannis Browne, custodis Cambii, &c. a primo die Jul. an. reg. Hen. viii. 34.". MSS. Harl. 698.—12.. On the twenty-third day of December, 1536, he was likewise by letters patent appointed, to exercise jointly with William Smythe, the office of clerk of all the briefs in the star-chamber at WestminsterPat. 26. Hen. viii. par. 1. Append. No. IV..
On February the twenty-eighth, 1538, he obtained, at his own instance, a new royal licence for exercising the office of clerk of the crown in conjunction with John LucasPat. 29. Hen. viii. ut supr., who was afterwards, in the reign of Edward the sixth, an eminent crown-lawyer, and employed by that prince in many important commissionsStrype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 498. And ibid. B. ii. Ch. xxix. pass.. The first of these grants he perhaps obtained by the recommendation of Sir Thomas More; who presiding as Lord Chancellor in the court above-mentioned, where Sir Thomas Pope was employed when a young man, might have taken particular notice of his promising diligence and abilities; and from which circumstance, a lasting friendship and intimacy between them both, as will be shewn hereafter, seems to have originally commenced. Although there is equal reason to suppose, as it will likewise appear in its proper place, that he was in no less favour and esteem with Sir Thomas More's successor, the Lord Chancellor Thomas lord Audley; under whose immediate inspection and authority he exercised the office of clerk of the crown, and clerk of the briefs in the star-chamber: and to both of which

departments, as I presume, he must have been appointed by Lord Chancellor Audley's nominationLord Audley was appointed Lord Keeper, May 20, 1532, on the resignation of Sir T. More: And Lord Chancellor, Jan. 26, 1533. Rym. Foed. xiv. 435, 446. Dugd. Chron. Ser. pag. 82. Both offices, I apprehend, were in the appointment of the Chancellor, as the clerk of the crown is at present: although they passed in the king's name. The star-chamber was a branch of chancery. Among Tanner's manuscripts there is an instrument, without date, but while Audley was chancellor, relating to the monastery of Furness, in Sir T. Pope's hand-writing. MSS. TANNER. 164. f. 44. Bibl. Bodl..But these appointments were soon succeeded by one of much greater consequence. For in the year 1536, he was constituted, by the king, Treasurer of the Court of augmentations of the king's revenue, on its first establishment by act of parliamentStatut. Hen. viii. An. 27. Cap. xxvii. See STATUTES by Berthelette, in two vol. Lond. 1543. See vol. ii. ibid. 1551. fol. xli. b..The principal design of this court was for estimating the lands of the dissolved monasteries, vested in the Crown, and for receiving their revenues. It had moreover full power and authority to sell the monastic possessions for the king's serviceFrom the act.. It was so called from the encrease which the royal revenue received,

by this new acquisition of property. All persons holding leases and pensions, by former grants, from any convent, exhibited their titles before this court, and their pretensions were allowed in proportion to their validity. And although the governors of the religious houses, foreseein their fate, often contrived immediately before the dissolution of their respective societies, to forge new contracts or indentures in favour of their friends or kindred, few frauds of this kind took effect. For the court seems to have been very vigilant in preventing and exposing such specious imposturesFuller Ch, Hist. B. vi. p. 349..The officers of this court were a Chancellor, it's superior, a Treasurer abovementioned, who was the second officer, a sollicitor, ten auditors, seventeen recievers, with others, belonging to the inferior departments. It was a court of record, and possessed of two sealsFrom the Act of parl. ut sup..The Treasurer's office appears to have been a post of considerable profit and distinction, and of equal trust and importance. He was ranked with the principal officers of state in the reign of Henry the eighth. For by statute of the same, he was privileged, together with

the chancellor of the said court, the chancellor of the dutchy of Lancaster, the treasurer of the king's chamber, the chancellor of the court of first Fruits and Tenths, the master of the king's wards and liveries, the groom of the stole, the warden of the cinque ports, and other honourable personages, respectively, to retain in his house one chaplain having a benefice with cure of souls, who should not be compelled to residenceStatut. Hen. viii. an. 33. c. xxviii. And 21. xiii.. The Treasurer was allowed a limited annual salary for the exercise of his office; as also perquisites for such sums of money as he paid to the patentees of any office, fee, or annuity, granted under the seal of the court: and also, for such disbursements as he made to any other persons, by virtue of the king's warrant or bill assigned, or by bill assigned and subscribed by the chancellor, and one other officer.These fees were regulated according to the practice of the court of the dutchy of LancasterEx Statut. ut supr.. The allowance of Sir John Williams, afterwards Lord Williams of Tame, Treasurer of this court in the reign of Edward the sixth, was 320 l. A sum, which I presume, was

then the full value of this placeFuller Ch. Hist. b. vi. p. 348. edit. 1651. In lieu of this salary, queen Mary granted Sir J. Williams a pension of the same value, when he quitted the treasurership. Dugd. Bar. ii. 393. edit. 1675.: but which, although very considerable, was much inferior to the emoluments of the same office, when in the possession of Sir Thomas Pope.The Treasurer at his admission was sworn before the chancellor, that he would reasonably and honestly procure the king's profit, administer justice to the poor as well as the rich, faithfully keep and expend the king's treasure, and exhibit a true declaration of it without concealment. The receivers were ordered to pay into his hands the whole rents of all the dissolved monasteries: concerning which he accounted annually before the chancellor and two auditors. The chaneellor, Treasurer, attorney, and sollicitor, or any two of them were entrusted with power or licence to act without the king's warrantEx Statut. ut supr..On the dissolution of any greater abbey, some of the auditors, who were employed in riding to survey the manors and lands of the court, repaired thither, and were lodged and

accommodated in the houseThus at the abbey of Evesham, some of the principal lodgings are ordered to be "reserved for the king's officers of the court of augmentations when they shall repair thither, &c." Stevens, Monast. i. 402.; for the purpose of acquiring intelligence, and of transacting the necessary business relating to the several estates, with more convenience and certainty. The first chancellor of this court was Sir Richard Rich, afterwards lord Rich, and lord high chancellor of EnglandDugd. Bar. ii. 387. Sir Edward North appears to have been chancellor of that court in 1545. From the dedication of Sir Thomas Elliot's book, entitled, Preservative against Death. Lond. 1545. 12mo..Sir Thomas Pope held the treasurership of this court about five years, and was succeeded by Sir Edward NorthDugd. Ibid. p. 394., privy counsellor and executor to Henry the eighth, and created a baron by queen Mary. About the same time he was appointed master, or treasurer, of the jewel-house in the towerEnglish Baronett. iv. 666. edit. 1741. From the information of Sir Henry Pope-Blount, cited in the margin. But this does not appear by the patents.. The yearly stipend of this office, when in the possession of Thomas lord Cromwell, about five years before, was fifty poundsDugd. ut supr. p. 370..
It would have broken the thread of my narrative, if I had before observed, that in 1535, June the twenty-sixth, beginning now to rise in the world, he received from Barker, otherwise garter king at arms, a patent for a new coat of arms, to be borne by him and his posterityPenes honoratis. Francisc. com. de Guildford. See Append. No. II.; which are the same that are now borne by Trinity college in Oxford: viz. Party per pale, or and azure, on a cheveron between three gryphons heads erased, four fleur de lys, all counterchargedHe ordered them to be placed in painted glass, twice in the hall, and twice in the President's lodgings, of that college. These escocheons were done by James Nicholson, glass-painter of London, each, at 6s. 8d. From a Loose Paper, in Thesaur. Coll. Trin. Oxon. I presume they were destroyed under the administration of the presbyterians.. To which it may be added here, that in the latter end of the following year, viz. 1536, on the fifteenth day of October, he was knighted by Henry eighthIn an instrument, in Thesaurar. coll. Trin. Oxon. dated 20 Dec. 1539. 31. Hen. viii. he is styled, "Egregius vir magister Thomas Pope, Thesaurarius cur. augment. &c." In another, ibid. dated 28 Jan. 34. Hen. viii. he is called miles. But Dugdale styles him knight, in 1539. Warw. p. 416. b., amid the solemnities attending the creations of the earl of Southampton, and the gallant Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, afterwards the

famous duke of Somerset. At which time Henry Howard, afterwards the celebrated and unfortunate earl of Surrey, also received the honor of knighthoodBrit. Mus. MSS. Cotton Claudius. C. 3. fol. 127. b..A few years after the erection of the court of augmentations above-mentioned, the king perceiving that his exigencies required more expeditious returns of money than the annual revenues of the dissolved monasteries could produce, was necessitated to sell by one extensive commission a very considerable part of their lands, for the purpose of raising present supplies. By this step the court of augmentations was soon diminished. The causes depending in it became few and inconsiderable, and the crownprofits arising from thence decreased; it's officers were numerous, and their pensions ample. On these considerations he was induced to dissolve it; which he did by letters patent only: and on the second of January, 1546, created by the same letters patent, a new court of augmentations, on a different and more confined plan.In an original rough draught of this new establishmentIn the British Museum. MSS. Harl. 600. 1., Sir Thomas Pope is nominated, by the king, master of the woods of the court

on this side the river Trent, and Sir John Williams, Treasurer. The other principal patentofficers, recited in the instrument, are Sir Edward North, who is appointed chancellor, Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir Thomas Moyle, general surveyors, Robert Henneage master of the woods beyond Trent, Richard Goodricke, attorney, and John Gosnold, sollicitor. The rest are Geoffry Gates, and John Arnscott, surveyors of the woods on each side Trent, and Richard Duke. The two masters of the woods on each side Trent, are styled the fourth officers. At this time Sir Thomas Pope was one of the king's privy-counsellorsHe is styled in the said instrument, "our trustie and well belovyd counsaillor." fol. 18. b. The first notice I have found of his being a privy counsellor, occurs in Pat. 36. Hen. viii. par. 11. Test. Mar. xxi. This was in 1545. Where he is called, "dilectus et fidelis consliarius noster." The total sum of yearly fees belonging to this court, on its second reduced establishmemt, amounted to 7249l. 10s. 3d.Fuller, Ch. hist. vi. p. 349..In the year 1553, the last of the reign of Edward the sixth, the first effort was made for the actual abolition of this court, which by degrees was become burthensome, and at length superfluous. Accordingly, the same year, at Mary's

accessionStatut. Mar. i. cap. x. But I find a renewal of Sir Richard Sackville's patent to the chancellorship of this court on queen Mary's accession. Pat. 1. Mar. Test. Jan. xx. par. 2. Sackville was chancellor at the death of Edward vi. He was constituted pat. 1. Edw. vi. Test. Aug. ii. par. 2. on North's resignation. it was incorporated into the exchequerSee Statut, Edw. vi. 7. C. ii.. Soon afterwards followed a grand sale of lands, which formerly came within the cognisance of this court, and continued in possession of the crown, under the conduct of commissioners; one of which was the chancellor of the exchequer. This appears from three valuable manuscript volumes in the British MuseumViz. liber primus de lez rates ann. 2, 3. Phil. Mar. fol. And the two following volumes, fol. MSS. Harl. 606, 607, 608. They are the originals., which the learned and accurate Wanley supposed to have belonged to the court of augmentations. But this could not be the case, as the first of them was made and begins so late as the year 1557, four years after the abolition of that court. They were however compiled in consequence of that institution, and may be considered among the last remains of its recordsThe CHAMBER of the court of augmentations was afterwards converted into the chamber of the court of wards, now long since dissolved. Edward vi. at his coronation, when he came from York-Place, is said to have robed himself in the chamber of the court of augmentations, "now called the court of wards," before he went into Westminster-hall. TIME's STORE-HOUSE, B. 5. ch. xix. pag. 502. fol. 1619. The chamber near the Exchequer, where the augmentation-records are at present reposited, is not the same. Which was the court of wards, and consequently, which was the augmentation court, will appear, by comparing the following passage of Stowe, who wrote in the reign of queen Elisabeth. "At the upper end of the great [Westminster] hall by the King's Bench, is a going up to a great chamber called the Whitehall, wherein is now kept the court of wards and liveries, and adjoining thereto is the court of requests." Survey Lond. p. 892. edit. 1616. The chamber therefore within or adjoining to Westminster-hall, at the upper end, and called the Whitehall, was the COURT OF AUGMENTATIONS..
It is commonly supposed, and it has been said in general terms, that Sir Thomas Pope was appointed one of the commissioners, or visitors, under Cromwell, for dissolving the religious houses. It is indeed true, that he was one of those, into whose hands the seal of the magnificent and opulent abbey of Saint Alban's was surrendered on the fifth day of December, 1539, by the last abbot, Richard StevenacheStevens's Monasticon, i. 264. Weever's Fun. mon. p. 112. edit. 1631.. This however is the only instance I can find, that he was ever concerned in this sort of business. His name does not appear among the persons specially appointed by Cromwell for this purpose; whose names are recited by DugdaleWarwickshire, p. 800, seq. from an authentic manuscript in the

Cotton Library. Nor does his name occur in the private commissions, which, after a diligent search, I have seen relating to this matter; nor in any instruments of resignation, letters of advice to the visitor general, memorials, or other authentic papers, concerning the visitation or suppression of any monastery. My opinion is therefore, that he was only occasionally employed at Saint Alban's, as being one of the principal officers in the court of augmentations, as the place was in the neighbourhood of London, and as the surrender of so famous an abbey was an affair of some importance. Thus we find that the priory, now the dean and chapter, of Canterbury, was not dissolved in the ordinary way; it being thought necessary, that the archbishop of Canterbury, the master of the rolls, Walter Henley attorney and Nicholas Bacon sollicitor of the augmentation-court with four others, should be sent thither, to take the resignation of the prior and monksSomner's CANTERBURY, by Batteley, Append. p. 118. It was 31. Hen. viii.. However, if it can be proved, that he was ever engaged on other occasions in these violent proceedings of an avaricious and arbitrary prince, it may at the same time be fairly presumed, that in an employment which afforded so many obvious temptations to fraud, oppression and rapacity,

he behaved with singular decency, moderation, and honour. Of this we have the impartial evidence of a prejudiced historian. For Fuller, who is remarkably severe on the visitors in general, and who is seldom sparing of his invectives, wherever he can discover the slightest foundation for abuse, mentioning Sir Thomas Pope as an agent in these affairs, immediately subjoins: "However, by all the printed books of that age, he appeareth one of a candid carriage; and in this respect stands sole and single by himself. That of the abbey-lands which he received, he refunded a considerable proportion for the building and endowing Trinity college in OxfordWorthies. London, p. 223.." And in another place, he mentions him with honour on the same subject. "But the most pleasant object to entertain us at this time in England, is the beholding of two fair and fresh foundations in Oxford; the one Trinity college, built by Sir Thomas Pope, principal visitor at the dissolution of abbiesThis is a mistake, as we have before seen.. Now as none were losers employed in that service, so we find few refunding back to charitable uses; and perchance this man alone the thankful Samaritane who made a publick acknowledgementChurch-Hist. B. viii. p. 39.." At the surrender

of Saint Alban's Abbey, he preserved by his interest, and particular application to the king, the noble conventual church now standing, and made parochialFrom the information of the late Sir Harry Pope-Blount, of Tittenhanger in Hertfordshire.: one of the earliest and most venerable monuments of Norman architecture remaining in EnglandIt was built by Paulin, the fourteenth abbot, a Norman, about the Year 1080..On the whole, the circumstance of his having received grants of the lands of the monasteries, seems to have occasioned the mistaken supposition that he was frequently and professedly concerned as a Commissioner in the dissolution of their foundations. That his prodigious property was accumulated in consequence of the destruction of the religious houses, is not denied: and the lucky oportunity of raising an estate from this grand harvest of riches which now lay open before him, seems to have diverted his thoughts from making a fortune by the law; a profession which he most probably would have otherwise continued to cultivate with the greatest success, and in which he might have undoubtedly claimed the most opulent and distinguished stations. I could give a minute detail, from the most authentic evidences, of the grants of abbey-land, which he

recieved during the reign of Henry the eighth; but it may suffice to observe in more general terms, that before the year 1556, he appears to have been actually possessed of more than thirty manors in Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, Warwickshire, Derbyshire, Bedfordshire, Herefordshire, and Kent; beside other considerable estates, and several advowsons. Some of these possessions were given him by Henry the eighth; but the greatest part was acquired by purchase while he was connected with the court of augmentationsSee Dugdale's Warwickshire. And from the patents.. Many of his estates were bought of Queen MaryEx muniment. coll. praedict. And lib. prim. lez rates, ann. 3, 4. Phil. Mar. MSS. Harl. 606. 257. fol. 114. In the British Museum, ut supr. And lib. secund. 607. 1. fol. 1.—13. fol. 7. b. ibid. In the charter of foundation for his college at Oxford, dat. Mar. iv. 1554, are recited twenty-seven manors and thirteen advowsons: beside impropriations and pensions. With all which he is licensed to enfeoff the college. Two years afterwards, viz. May 1, 1556, in the statutes of the college, he recites thirty-five manors. Cap. vi. Afterwards he made other acquisitions..But let us suppose, what indeed cannot be proved, that Sir Thomas Pope was one of Cromwell's visitors in the affair of the monasteries. For although I have insinuated above, that these visitors were not on all occasions entirely justifiable in their proceedings, I am yet

inclined to think, that their conduct and behaviour were in general less blameable than has been commonly represented.It is no wonder, that the monks should load those whom they esteemed the instruments of their ruin with many calumnies; all which were studiously propagated and heightened by their advocates of the catholic persuasion. And it should at the same time be remembered, that the king's injunctions, under which they acted, were extremely severe; insomuch, that many fraternities desired their houses might be rather entirely suppressed, than reformed under such rigorous conditions.With regard to the vices and disordersEven in the Nunneries, where, among the softer sex, some degree of delicacy, at least of decorum, might have justly been expected, the lowest vices, not to insist on the more criminal irregularities, were too often practised. In the Benedictine convent of Rumsey, in Hamshire, at a visitation by Bishop Fox, held in the year 1506, Joyce Rows the abbess is accused of immoderate Drinking, especially "tempore nocturno;" and of inviting the nuns to her chamber every evening, for the purpose of these excesses, "post completorium." The nuns are also forbidden to have such frequent and familiar access, at undue times, to the house of the bailiff or chief hind of the monastery, whence unfavourable suspicions have arisen; and the said bailiff himself is ordered, no more to frequent the chambers of the abbess or nuns. Some of them are enjoined to abstain "a societate sacerdotum;" and the abbess in particular is commanded to avoid all communications with Seculars; especially with some whose names are expressly mentioned, and who are known to have "accessum et recursum ad Eam." One of the injunctions to the nuns in general is, "Quòa sint sobriae, et se abstineant a potu post Completcrium." Apud Registr. Fox, Episc. Wint. Lib. i. fol. 42. b. This was a rich convent, and filled with ladies of the best families., which they pretended to have detected in the

monasteries, their reports sometimes perhaps deserve credit, as those enormities are too naturally and unavoidably connected with the monastic institution. In this, as in all other cases of that sort, mutual opposition produced mutual obloquy.Nor should it be forgotten, that the visitors gave a favorable report of some houses. They interceded earnestly for the nunnery of God-stowe in Oxfordshire: declaring that the nuns were strict in their lives; and alledging that the suppression of this house would prove an irreparable inconvenience, as most of the young ladies of the best families of that county were sent thither for educationBurnet. Reformat. i. 238. This was common in other nunneries. Tanner, from the accounts of the cellaress of Carhow near Norwich, gives us a curious specimen of what was received "pro perhendinationibus" or the board of young ladies, and their servants, for education. "Rec. de dom. Margeria Wederley perhendinant. ibid. xi septimanas, xiii. s. iv. d. Pro mensa unius famulae dictae Margeriae per iii. septimanas, viii. d. per sept. &c." NOT. MON. fol. pref. p. xxxii. [Ex orig. Rot. nunc in Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Tanner.]. From the abbey of

saint Edmondsbury in Suffolk they wrote to Cromwell, that they could find nothing scandalous in the Abbot or any member of the conventBurnet, ibid. 236.. After surveying the stately and ancient abbey of Glastonbury, they recommended it to the Lord Privy seal, that the buildings, at least, might be suffered to remain undemolished; representing, that the structure in general of this monastery was so magnificent, that it might very properly be spared, and easily be converted into a palace for the kingWillis's Mitr. Abb. i. 109.. Gyffard, in particular, one of the visitors, petitioned in the strongest terms for the absolute continuance of the monastery of Woolstrope in Lincolnshire. I will insert the words of his letter to Cromwell; not only because they contain an unexpected instance of candour, compassion, and honesty, but as they preserve a curious picture of a well-regulated religious house, of the second magnitude, at that period. "The governor thereof [Woolstrope] is a verie good husbande for the howse, and well beloved of all the inhabitants thereunto adjoynynge:—a right honest man, having ryghte religious persones, being prests of ryght good conversacion, and lyvynge relygiously: having such qualities of vertue as we have

not found the lyke in no place. For ther is not one religious person ther, but that he can and doth use, either embrotheryng, writinge bokes with verie fair hande, makyng their owne garments, carving, paynting, or graffing [graving]. The howse wythout eny slaunder or ill fame, and standinge verie solitarie: keepinge such hospitalitie, that, except singular good provysion, it could not be manytened with half so much land more as they may spend. Such a number of the pore inhabitants nigh thereunto daily relieved, that we have not seene the lyke, havinge no more lands than they have. God be even my judge, as I do wryte unto yow the troth. Which verie pitie causeth me to write. The premises considered, I beseche yow to be a meane to the king's majestie, for the standinge of the sayde WolstropeStrype Eccl. Mem. i. 255. From the former part of this letter, not printed by Strype, it appears, that the king had been disgusted at the favorable representation made by Gyffard and his associates, of this and other monasteries: but that his Majesty's displeasure did not prevent him from telling the truth. "And forasmuch as of late my fellowes and I wright untoo Mr. Chancellor of the augmentacions, in the favour of thabbey of seynt James, and the nunnerie of Catesbie in Northamptonshire: which letters be shewed unto the kynge's highnes in the favour of those howses, where the kyngis highnes was displeased, as he sayd to my servaunt, sayinge, that it was like that we had receyved rewards, which caused us to wright as we dyd; which myght putt mee in feare to wright: notwithstanding the sure knowledge that I have had allway in your indifferens, gyveth me boldness to wright to you in the favour of the house of Woolstrope. The Governor thereof, &c." Dat. Jun. xix. 1537. Brit. Mus. MSS. Cott. Glaud. E. iv. fol. 213. The letter about Catesby will be cited below.." The same

commissioner, with three others of his associates in the visitation, pleaded in the same benevolent strain for the nunnery of Catesby in Northamptonshire. "This house we found in very perfett order. The priores a sure, wise, discreet, and very relygious woman; with ix nunnys under her obedyence, as relygious and devout, and with as good obedyence as we have in time paste seen, or belyke shall see. The seid howse standyth in such a quarter much to the releff of the king's people, and his grace's pore subjects their [there] likewyse moo relieved.—Wherefore yf yt shuld please the kyng's highnes to have eny remorse, that eny such religious howse shall stande; we think his grace cannot appointe eny howse more mete to shewe his most gracious charitie and pitey over than on the saide howse of CatesbyStrype ibid. who has printed it incorrectly from Bibl. Cotton, MSS. Cl. iv. fol. 209. Brit. Mus. see other letters of the like kind in Collier, Eccl. hist. p. 2. b. iii. pag. 156.." I find also Gyffard interceding in the same manner for the nunnery of Polesworth in Warwickshire.
"Wherein is an abbes namyd dame Alice Fitzherbert, of the age of lx yeares, a very sadde, discreate, and religyous woman:—and in the same howse, under her rule, are xii vertuous and religyous nonnes, and of good conversation.—Wherefore ye myght do a ryght good and merytorious dede, to be medyatour to the kyng's highnes for the said howse to stande and remayne unsuppressed.—And in the town of Polesworth are xliv tenements, and never a plough but oneNor was it likely there should be another, while the nunnery remained. The truth is, wherever there was a monastery, idleness was encouraged, and the usual incitements to labour and industry were superseded.: the resydue be artifycers, laborers, and victellers, and live in effect by the said howse, and the repayre and resorte that ys made to the gentylmens children and studiountes, that ther do lyf, to the nombre sometyme of xxx and sometyme xl and more; that their be ryght vertuously brought upp, &c. Written at Maxstocke beside Coventree the xxviii day of JulyMSS. Cotton. Claud. E. iv. ut supr. fol. 210. b.." [1537.] Many others of the commissioners also shewed a compassionate concern for the religious at their expulsion, in providing them proper pensions,

according to their age, infirmities, or other circumstances of distressStrype, ubi supr. seq. Willis Mitr. Abb. &c. Dr. London, one of the visitors, thus writes to lord Cromwell about the monastery of De La Pre near Northampton. "Besechinge your lordship to be gude lorde unto herre [the abbess] and to herre poor sisters in their pensions." MSS. Cotton. ut supr. fol. 208..In the reign of Henry the eighth, Sir Thomas Pope was employed in various services and attendances about the court. He was appointedPerhaps as clerk of the crown., April 21, 1544, together with Sir Edward North, afterwards Lord North, to convey the great seal of England, being resigned by the lord chancellor Audley then indisposed, to the king at his new palace of Westminster, who delivered it into the custody of Sir Thomas Wriothessey"Memorandum, quod die Lunae, viz. vicesimo primo die Aprilis, anno regni Domini nostri Henrici octavi, dei gratia, Angliae, &c, tricesimo quinto: Thomas Audeley miles, dominus Audeley de Walden, tunc Cancellarius Angliae, infirmitate corporis debilitatus, magnum sigillum . . . . praefato domino regi, per Edvardum North militem, et Thomam Pope militem, misit; qui quidem Edvardus, et Thomas Pope, sigillum illud, in quâdam bagâ de albo corio inclusum, et sigillo dicti Dom. cancellarii munitum, regiae magestati apud Palatium suum novum Westmonasteriense, in camerâ suâ privatâ . . . . in presentiâ Thomae Henneage militis, et Antonii Denny armigeri, praesentarunt et obtulerunt: humiliter supplicantes . . . . eandem regiam magestatem, quatenus idem D. rex sigillum suum praedictum recipere et acceptare dignetur. Super quo dictus D. rex sigillum illud, per manus ipsorum Edvardi et Thomae Pope, recepit et acceptavit, &c. &c." Rymer, Foed. Tom. xv. p. 20. Super deliberatione magni sigilli.. There is a circumstance

relating to this resignation which is not mentioned by any of our historians. For the king committed the seal to Sir Thomas Wriothesley, with the title of keeper, only during the indisposition of lord Audley; with the reservation of reinstating him in the chancellorship on his recoveryRymer, ibid.. In 1547, he seems to have been summoned and examined by the privy council, concerning certain treasonable expressions which had dropped from Thomas duke of Norfolk, afterwards condemned with lord Surrey but not executed, in reference to the Act of UsesHerbert's Hist. Hen. viii. p. 564. edit. 1649. The historian says, "One Thomas Pope informed the council, &c." It may therefore be doubted whether he means sir Thomas Pope. But it is the same in Masters's Text of this history, in Jesus college library. MSS. No. 2098. 79. vol. 3.. He was a singular and most intimate friend of sir Thomas More, who seems to have taken early notice of him, as I before hinted, when a young man in the court of chancery; and was sent by the king, to notify to that illustrious sufferer in the cause of mistaken conscience, the hour appointed for his execution.
As the interview between these two friends, on this important occasion, is memorable and interesting, I shall insert it at length.On the fifth day of JulySee More's WORKES. fol. 1537. pag. 1457., 1535, he waited on sir Thomas More, then under condemnation in the Tower, early in the morning; and acquainted him that he came by command of the king and council, to bring his unfortunate friend the melancholy news, that he must suffer death before nine of the clock the same morning, and that therefore he should immediately begin to prepare himself for that aweful event. Upon this message, More, without the least surprize or emotion, chearfully replied; "Master Pope, I most heartily thank you for your good tidings. I have been much bound to the king's highness for the benefits of his honors that he hath most bountifully bestowed upon me; yet am I more bound to his grace, I assure you, for putting me here, where I have had convenient time and space to have remembrance of my end. And so help me god. Most of all am I bound unto him, that it hath pleased his majesty so shortly to rid me out of the miseries of this wicked world." Then Pope subjoined, that

it was the king's pleasure that at the place of execution he should not use many words. To this More answered, that he was ready to submit to the king's commands; and added, "I beseech you good Mr. Pope, to gett the king to suffer my daughter Margaret to be present at my burial." Pope assured him that he would use his utmost interest with the king for this purpose: and having now finished his disagreeable commission, he solemnly took leave of his dying friend, and burst into tears. More perceiving his concern, said with his usual composure; "Quiet yourself, good Mr. Pope, and be not discomforted; for I trust that we shall one day in heaven see each other full merrily, where we shall be sure to live and love together in joyful bliss eternallyRoper's Life of More, by T. Hearne, 4. 57.." But this method of consolation proving ineffectual, More to divert the melancholy of his friend, and to dismiss him in better spirits, called for a glass; and applying it as an urinal, he held it up to the light, and with the prophetic air of a sagacious physician gravely declared, "This man might have lived longer if it had pleased the kingThomae Mori Vita et Exitus: by J. H. gent. Lond. 1652. pag. 127.."
In consequence of sir Thomas Pope's intercession with the king, agreeably to More's earnest and dying request, his favorite daughter, Margaret Roper, and others of his family were permitted to be present at his interment, which was performed immediately after the execution in the chapel of the Tower. But Margaret afterwards, and probably by the same interest, begged the body of the king, and deposited it on the south-side of the choir of the church of Chelsea, where a monument, with an inscription written by himself, had been erected some time before. This affectionate daughter, whose resolution equals her pity, also found means to procure her father's head, after it had remained, ignominiously stuck on a pole, on London bridge, for fourteen days. For this daring fact she was apprehended and imprisoned; but declaring in her defence before the privy council, that she had bought it that it might not in the end become food for fishes in the Thames, she was dischargedWeever Fun. Mon. 505, 506, 522. Biograp. Brit. MORE. pag. 3165.. However she carefully preserved it for some time in a leaden box, till an opportunity offered of conveying

it to Canterbury, where she placed it in a vault belonging to her husband's family, under a chapel adjoining to saint Dunstan's church in that cityWood, Ath. Oxon. i. 39..SECT. II.IN the reign of Edward the sixth, when the religious and political affairs of the kingdom took another turn, and all public business fell into the hands of new ministers and managers, sir Thomas Pope did not comply with the times. He was appointed to no office, nor enjoyed any favor in this reign. He received indeed some grants of land from the crown about the first year of this king, with Cranmer archbishop of Canterbury, the duke of Somerset, the earl of Warwick, the marquis of Northampton, and several other principal persons of the court. But these grants were made for past services, and in consideration of other claims due from the deceased kingStrype Eccl. Mem. ii. 78.—Some of the particulars may perhaps be seen in pat. 1. Edw. vi. test. Jul. 24. par. 4.—Likewise, in this reign, sir Richard Leigh is licenced to alienate a manor to sir T. Pope, pat. 1. Edw. vi. test. Maii 27. par. 7.—Sir T. Pope is licenced to alienate a pasture in Bermondsey to Will. Gerrard, pat. 2. Edw. vi. test. Jan. 16. par. 3.—Sir T. Pope is licenced to alienate the manor of Broughton, co. Oxon. to William Godolphin and Henry Boothe, pat. 5. Edw. vi. test. Sept. 17. par. 7. These are all the patents, of any sort, which he received in this reign..
The unlimited authority, and arbitrary dominion of Henry, had kept both protestants and papists in subjection. Under such a government they both acted uniformly, and neither party presumed to claim any apparent superiority. But upon the decease of that uncontroulable monarch, the people discovered their real sentiments without reserve, and protestantism manifestly began to be the prevailing religion. The protector Somerset, who had long been a secret partisan of the reformers, on the accession of young Edward, publicly declared his intention of forwarding and establishing the reformation. In this scheme he was happily seconded by most of the privy council, who after the fall of Southampton seem entirely to have deserted the catholic communion. The protector wisely took care that all persons to whom he entrusted the education of the young king, should be attached to these rational principles; and preferred and encouraged those alone that appeared active in this profession.Thus most of the courtiers, yet more perhaps in general from lucrative views than from real conviction, became converts to the predominant party: amongst which, however, I do not find sir Thomas Pope. This, at least,

shews a steadiness and uniformity of mind in those days of change, which afford such frequent instances of occasional compliance.Nor let it be deemed any inconsistency of character, that he, though a rigid papist, should have been in the preceding reign an agent for suppressing the monasteries, and a receiver of their possessions. For the demolition of these houses was not an act of the church but of the state. It was prior to the reformation of religion, and effected by a king and parliament of the popish communion. It was even confirmed by the parliament of queen MaryStatut, 1, 2. Phil. Mar. cap. viii. inf. citat..Very few papists wrote or remonstrated against the destruction of these societies. Without the least impeachment of their principles, or suspicion of apostacy, several others, the strictest members of the catholic persuasion, and the most respectable characters of those times, among which, to mention no more, was the duke of Norfolk, accepted grants of the conventual estates.Even the clergy thought it no sacrilege to share in these acquisitions. The dean and

chapter of Litchfield, and the abbot and convent of Westminster, made no scruple of receiving manors alienated from other religious corporationsSee Tanner's Notit. Mon. fol. edit. pref. p. xxxix., lately dissolved. Burnet tells usRef. i. 251., that bishop Gardiner was remarkably vehement in declaiming against the monasteries; and that in many of his sermons he commended the king for supperssing themSee Fox, vol. ii. p. 426.. Queen Mary, in the very first year of her reign, made grants of the site of twenty religious houses, and of very large quantities of abbey-landTanner, ubi supr.. The bishops and clergy in a catholic convocation, 1554, petitioned that the pope would not insist on a restitution of the ecclesiastical revenues, but rather confirm them to those lords and gentlemen by whom they had been obtainedWilkins's Councils. iv. 10t.. And it is notorious, that some of the popish bishops were no less alienators of their episcopal endowmentsTanner ubi supr. And Collier Eccl. hist. xi. 324, 306. Heylin p. 121., than many other bishops of the protestant church proved afterwards, in the reigns of Edward the sixth and Elizabeth. The bishop of Chichester, in opening the disputation of Henry the eighth

with Lambert, in Westminster-hall, ranked the king's disincorporation of the monks with his rejection of the see of Rome, his abolition of idolatrous adoration, and the introduction of the English bible; as a matter of an external nature, and in no respect interfering with the essentials of the catholic communionSee MSS. C. C. C. C. cxxvii. 5.. The monastic institution was no part of the papistic theology. Undoubtedly the suppression of the convents facilitated the admission of protestatism: but it was evidently undertaken on other principles.When queen Mary succeeded to the throne, sir Thomas Pope was again taken into favour, and soon afterwards constituted one of the queen's privy counsellorsHollingshead. iii. 1159. Speed, 854.. He is likewise said to have been appointed cofferer to the housholdMSS. Rawlins. bibl. Bodl. History of Oxfordshire, Wroxton. But it does not appear by the patents. And Richard Freston is made cofferer, pat. 3, 4. Phil. Mar. par. 2..But before I proceed further in this reign, it may be proper to obviate some seeming difficulties and inconsistences, by premising, on what security sir Thomas Pope, together with many others, held his church-revenues, under

a bigotted catholic queen, and upon the restoration of the popish religion. By way of procuring new concessions in favour of Rome, and to prevent unseasonable alarms, at the beginning of this reign, both the queen and the pope had given repeated assurances that the church and abbey lands should remain, forever unreclaimed, in the hands of their present possessorsHeylin Eccle. rest. p. 41.. But that the tenure of these possessions should not be fixed on so precarious a foundation as that of mere promises, in 1554, an act of parliament was passed; which, while it restored the pope's authority, gave absolute security to the proprictors of the ecclesiastical estates, entirely confirmed their title beyond the power of resumption, and, at the same time, exempted them from the danger of spiritual censuresStatut. 1, 2. Phil. Mar. cap. viii.. In the mean time, that this measure might receive the fullest sanction, cardinal Pole, who was invested by the pope with legantine jurisdiction, ratified the parliament's decree: and, that the dispensation might be still more ample and effectual, in consequence of his master's commission, the legate ensured even the property of future acquisitions of church lands to the present receiversIbid. And Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 159. seq. See also Harl. miscell. vii. p. 264, 266..
Thus, an equivalent was granted on both sides. The nobility and gentry were settled in the quiet enjoyment of their estates; and the pope, although most essentially weakened by the alienation of that wealth on which his power so much depended, was reinstated in his supremacy over the church.During this reign sir Thomas Pope was often employed in commissions of consequence. On the twenty-ninth day of July, 1553, he was commissioned by the council, together with sir Arthur Darcy, and othersBurghley's State papers, by Haynes, p. 162., to apprehend lord Russel, Anthony Browne of Essex, and several accomplices concerned in the duke of Northumberland's insurrection; who, on the death of Edward, had raised an army with an intent to place the lady Jane Gray on the throne, before Mary was proclaimed queen. The duke himself had been apprehended some little time before. For after many fruitless efforts, and vain expectations of a reinforcement, he suddenly changed his principles, dismissed his troops, and tamely submitted to proclaim queen Mary with all external demonstrations of triumph and satisfaction. Being immediately arrested by the

earl of Arundel, he fell on his knees and abjectly begged his lifeBurnet, Ref. ii. 239..In the same year, on the twenty-third day of February, I find him directed by the council, together with lord Rich, the master of the rolls, the lieutenant of the Tower, and others, to appoint a certain number of the council, who should constantly remain, and dispatch business, at LondonQ Mary's council book, MSS. Harl. Brit. mus. 643.. For the court, whom the privy council always followed and attended, was often held at different palaces in the country; as at Oatelands, Richmond, Greenwich, and other placesIn the reign of Henry the eighth, the principal places of the royal residence in the country were Richmond, Hampton court, Wird or, Eltham, and Woodstock. In a book of Injunctions for that king's houshold, given by Cardinal Wolsey, it is at these five palaces only, when the king is present, that the solemnities of the Chapel and Hall are ordered to be kept. MSS. Laud. K. 48.. At the same time he is commanded, with the same persons, to give orders for victualling and furnishing the Tower of LondonCouncil book.. There was another commission, the same year, directed by the queen to sir Richard Southwell, and others, for inspecting the office of ordinance, and examining the state of ammunition in the TowerStrype Eccl. Mem. iii. 33.. By which

it appears, that this department had been greatly neglected in the foregoing reign; or that the queen was willing to take the proper precautions against any future attack on her title, from her factious and discontented subjects. The same year, on the twenty-ninth day of October, he was appointed, with the lord treasurer, the earl of Arundel, lord Rich, sir Francis Englefield, and several others, to examine certain offenders taken in Northumberland's rebellion, and to assess their finesBurghley's State papers, ut supr. p. 193.. Soon afterwards, in the beginning of 1554, I find him present, together with sir Philip Denny, sir Thomas Brydges, and others, when sir Thomas Wyat, and his desperate associates, after their rash and abortive enterprise, were led prisoners into the tower of London. On which occasion sir Thomas Pope severely reproached Brett, one of the principal rebels, for his complicated cowardice and treachery. A charge which the prisoner could not but acknowledge with much shame and confusion. For Brett, being the captain of a detachment of archers in the queen's service, had privately revolted with all his party at a time of danger, and joined Wyat's armyMSS. Annale of queene Marie her reigne. MSS. Harl. 194. Brit Mus.—This, and other particulars, have been transeribed by Stowe. Annals, ed. 1615. p. 621. col. 2.—The manuscript adds, that during the skirmish of Charing-cross in which Wyat was taken, "there stood upon the leades [of the white tower] the marques of Northampton, sir Nicholas Poines, Sir Thomas Pope, master John Seimer, and others." This passage is also transcribed by Stowe. This manuscript formerly belonged to Stowe, who drew from it great part of queen Mary's reign: yet omiting many passages. It is cited by sir Simonds D'Ewes, to whom it afterwards belonged, in his tract, entit. Primitive Practise for preserving Truth. Lond. 1645. 4to. He says it was written "by a courtier under queen Mary,—the very autograph being in my library, written with his own hand." p. 13..
In the same year, sir Thomas Pope was one of the champions at a magnificent justing exhibited before the queen at Westminster. On which occasion the horses were richly caparisoned with red velvet and silver bosses, and the helmets of the knights were plumed with ostrich-feathers. Many Spanish noblemen were presentMSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype..On the fifteenth of March, 1554, he was constituted, with sir Robert Rochester, comptroller of the houshold, sir Richard Southwell, sir Thomas Cornwallis, sir Edmund Peckham, and sir Edward North, knights, a commissioner, for examining, adjusting, and balancing the accounts of sir Thomas Gresham, who was agent to the queen at Antwerp for taking

up money of the merchants of that cityRymer's Foed. tom. xv. p. 371. Pro Thoma Gresham de commissariis ad computa examinanda."Mary by the grace of God, &c. To our right trustie and wel-belovid counsaillors, sir Rob. Rochester, comptroller of our house, sir Rich. Southwell, knight, sir Thomas Cornwallis, knight, and to our trustie and right wel-belovid sir Edward North, and sir Thomas Pope, knights, Greetinge. . . . We having special trust and confidence in your approvid fidelities, wisdomes, and circumspections, &c.". The commissioners are ordered to examine, allow, and determine all receipts, payments, charges, and discharges, declarations, or employments, of sir Thomas Gresham, or his agents; to assign him, by deduction, an allowance of twenty shillings per day, with all incidental expences: and finally to acquit and discharge the said sir Thomas Gresham: to charge and discharge all allowances and defalcations in stating the account, according to their wisdom and discretion, either of monies taken up for Edward the sixth, or for the present queen. For this business sir Thomas Pope was admirably qualified, from that knowledge and experience in stating extensive and complicated accounts, which he must have acquired while he was concerned in the court of Augmentations. And for the same reason, in the succeeding reign, sir Walter Mildmay was deputed by the lords, to make a general inquisition of the royal revenueStrype. Ann. Ref. i. 13. sect. ii..
This expedient of borrowing money at an exorbitant interest of the merchants of Antwerp, was a measure which Mary was obliged to put in practice more than onceCouncil-book. MSS. Brit. Mus. ut supr.. And it had been to her honor, if she had used no worse. For indeed the chief object of government, which for some time engaged her attention, was to raise large sums by the most irregular methods, or to extort money from her subjects. She sometimes endeavoured to recruit her exhausted exchequer by retrenching the public expences at home. She demolished several forts on the river below Gravesend, which were filled with superfluous garrisons; she broke all the body guards, half the band of pensioners, the gentlemen of the stables, and the pages of honor: and proposed to disband the hundred archers of the guard. But to frugality she added oppression, and her unhappy necessities frequently compelled her to the most violent and unjustifiable experiments. She levied sixty thousand marks from seven thousand yeomen, and thirty-six thousand pounds from the merchants. This was exacted, because they had not contributed to a former loan of sixty thousand pounds levied on a thousand persons, in

whose compliance, either on account of their loyalty or their riches, she firmly confided. But that tax not being found sufficient, she exacted a general loan of an hundred pounds each, on all who possessed an annual income of twenty pounds. This imposition obliged many of the gentry to reduce their domestic expences, and to dismiss many of their servants, that they might, at least more prudently, comply with her commands. And as these servants, having no means of subsistence, by too common a transition from that state of idleness, betook themselves to theft and robbery, the queen knew no better method of redressing the grievance, than to publish a proclamation, obliging their former masters to take them back to their services. In order to gratify the city of London for past favors, and to engage them to assist her with future supplies, she issued an edict, at their instance, prohibiting for four months, the exportation of English clothes into Flanders. By this iniquitous combination, a good market was procured in that country for such as had already sent thither large quantities of that sort of merchandiseCarte, iii. 330, 331, 337, 341..Her extravagancies proved a perpetual obstruction to the commercial interests of the

kingdom. Her own bigottry was not always a sufficient restraint on her conscience, to prevent her from exposing to sale the revenuesSee supr. pag. 40. of that church, in defence of which she had sacrificed in the flames so many victims. But it would be endless and impertinent here, to mention at large her multiplied extortions; and the various imprudent or fraudulent schemes, which her exigencies invented for obtaining money. It may be sufficient to add, that these expedients were employed, not to carry on an expensive war, for she was in profound peace with all the world; nor to promote the national welfare by any new establishments or improvements: but to satisfy the unjust demands of a husband, who slighted her love, neglected her interests, and solely consulted his own convenience.On this occasion one cannot help observing the weakness of the human mind under the most powerful and importunate of passions. Mary regarded her husband Philip with all the fondness and sollicitude of an uncertain lover. This attachment produced strange contradictions in her sentiments and behaviour. She was naturally too phlegmatic to be profuse; yet, from a penurious and economical habit

of mind, she suddenly became rapacious and expensive. She persecuted the reformed with the most barbarous severities, yet alienated the riches assigned to support her favorite superstitions. In this situation, she was at once deserted by that cold and stoical inflexibility which distinguishes her character; and the sedate and gloomy queen suffered herself to be betrayed into greater inconsistencies of conduct, than even the most unaccountable caprice of her father Henry could have dictated.Before the reign of queen Mary, it was the common practice with our English princes to have recourse to the city of Antwerp for voluntary loans; and we generally find their credit so low, that they were obliged to engage the city of London to join in the security. But this business seems never to have been so effectually conducted as by that public-spirited and enterprizing merchant, sir Thomas Gresham, who began to be employed in this agency by Edward the sixthSee Burghley's State papers, by Haynes, p. 185. And Ward's Life of Gresham, p. 7.. He was likewise employed by queen Elizabeth for the same purpose; one of whose first steps, at her accession, was to procure money. She

sent Gresham to Antwerp to borrow two hundred thousand pounds, in order to enable her to reform the coinage, at that time extremely debased. But, as a most sensible and acute historian observesHume, hist. Eliz. p. 731. edit. 410., she was so impolitic as to make herself an innovation in the coin; by dividing a pound of silver into sixty-two shillings, instead of sixty, the former standard.In the year 1557, on the eighth of February, sir Thomas Pope was joined by the queen, in a famous commission for the more effectual suppression of hereticsBurner's Reformation, Coll. of records, part. ii. b. ii. p. 311. "Having special trust and confidence in your fidelities, wisdoms, and discretions, &c.", in concert with Bonner, bishop of London, Thirlby, bishop of Ely, the Lords Windsor and North, secretary Bourne, sir John Mordaunt, sir Francis Englefield, sir Edward Waldegrave, sir Nicholas Hare, sir Roger Cholmeley, sir Richard Read, sir Thomas Stradling, sir Rowland Hill, serjeant Rastall, Cole, dean of saint Paul's, William Cooke, Thomas Martin, John Story, and John Vaughan, doctors of law, and William Roper and Ralph Cholmeley, esquires. These commissioners were empowered to enquire after all persons suspected of heretical

opinions: to search for and seize seditious and heterodox books, either exposed to sale, or secreted in private houses: to investigate and examine concealments, contempts, conspiracies, and calumnies, against the government. They were ordered to detect those persons who refused to preach the sacrament of the altar, to hear mass, to take holy bread or holy water, to frequent their respective public churches, and to assist in the solemn processions. They were likewise privileged to summon what witnesses they judged most proper, and to tender oaths to the parties prosecuted, for answering such questions as might be deemed most convenient for discovering the truth, In this injunction however, there is a remarkable clause of restraint upon the commissioners. For it is expressly commanded, that if any person brought before them for heretical doctrines or opinions, should still obstinately persist in his error, "He should immediately be committed to his ordinary, there to be used according to the spiritual and ecclesiastical laws."Bishop Burnet, whose imagination was perpetually haunted with the horrors of popery, supposes, that something more dreadful was intended by this commission than appears at first sight, and that it was undoubtedly designed

as the tribunal of an Inquisition in EnglandHist. Ref. ii. 347.. But a superficial reader may plainly perceive, that there is nothing of the form, process, or power, of an Inquisition contained in this instrument. The commissioners receive no authority to try heterodoxy, nor to put the offenders upon making an act of faith. On the contrary, they are directed to deliver up all delinquents to the ordinary. And even here the process is to be regulated by the laws of the church. These circumstances seem sufficiently to exclude the idea of an inquisitorial tribunal. For the proceedings of the commissioners, however rigorously they might have been conducted, were not unlimited and arbitrary; but finally determinable by the proper ecclesiastical officer, who was himself controlled by the spiritual constitutions of the land, which did not at least on this occasion, receive any degree of extension. The zealous bishop makes the matter still more alarming, where he tells us, that in support of such measures, "he finds it said, that some advised that courts of inquisition, like those in France and Spain, might be set up in EnglandUbi supr. p. 346.." But he does not inform us by whom this is said, nor can I find this advice

in any of our historians. Even Fox, who omits nothing that can expose the papists, who has studiously recorded all the idle reports of the times, and who supposed that the papists worshipped one god and the protestants anotherHe thus rallies the devotion of the people, for praying for Mary's happy delivery of a child, "Cry up louder you priests, peradventure YOUR GOD IS ASLEEP. Vol. iii. p. 116., is silent on this important subject. And indeed if we consider the queen's late expostulation with the pope, in which she declared her resolution of maintaining the prerogative and the constitutionWhen the Pope would have obtruded a new legate, in the place of cardinal Pole, and while he was actually on his journey to England, the queen absolutely refused his admission into the kingdom. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 403.; if we recollect that Philip's confessor, Alphonsus, expressly declaimed against persecutions in the pulpit, by the king's own desireNeal's Hist. Pur. i. 99. Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 239. Heylin, p. 56. Burnet, Ref. ii. 305.: and if to these reasons we add the distinguished lenity, moderation, and candor of cardinal Pope; this project of an English inquisition must appear altogether improbable.But whatever was the real state of the case, we find that the commissioners, sensible that persecution naturally counteracts its own purpose,

and averse to measures which might probably end in the most inhuman punishments, did little or nothing in this businessHeylin, ubi supr.: especially as to the detection of prohibited books. For so inactive were they, that on the sixth of June, 1558, the queen was obliged to publish a proclamationHeylin, ubi supr. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 459.; in which she complains, that not only numberless seditious and treasonable treatises, were printed at home and dispersed without controul, but even imported from abroad. As the provocation was great, so the proclamation is conceived in the most despotic and unconstitutional terms. It sets forth, amonst other extraordinary menaces, that if those persons who find such unlawful books do not immediately destroy them, they shall be reputed rebels, and executed accordingly by martial law. The queen indeed had some reason for complaint, and for substituting somewhat more effectual in the place of her former commission by this recent injunction. For during the actual subsistence and authority of that commission, Knox and Goodman printed, and imported from Geneva, a piece entitled, The first Blast of the Trumpet against the monstrous Regimen of WomenGenev. 8vo. 1558.. In

this performance, which is full of paradox and enthusiasm, they call the queen Traitress, Bastard, Proserpine; with other terms of illiberal and ridiculous abuse. Goodman also published about the same time, How superior Powers ought to be obeyed of their Subjects, and wherein they may be lawfully by God's Word disobeyed and resistedGenev. 16to. 1558. printed by John Crispin. Unluckily, Mary herself while princess, in 1548, yet certainly without any heretical intention, had published a piece, which of course fell under the censure of this commission. It was a translation of Erasmus's paraphrase on St. John, and done by desire of queen Catharine Parr. The preface is written by Udall, master of Eton-school; in which he much extolls, and I believe not without reason, Mary's proficience in literature.. But these treatises, written chiefly for the gratification of Calvin then living at Geneva, were not more invectives against the invincible bigottries of Mary, and the gross absurdities of popery, than they were openly subversive of all established government and religion. Just before, a book of very pernicious tendency had appearedCollier, Eccl. Hist. p. ii. p. 404., called a Treatise of politick PowerSupposed to be written by Poynett, the deprived bishop of Winton. infra citat. Stowe reports, that Poynett was in Wyatt's army; but that finding that enterprise likely to miscarry, he fled, and embarked for Germany, where he joined has reformed brethren, the religious exiles. Stowe, Ann. per Howes, p. 620.. Plays and enterludes ridiculing the queen's person and

government were exhibitedCouncil book. MSS. Harl. and Strype. Burnet.. Libels and satires were thrown into the houses of the privy counsellors; and even dropped in the queen's own chamber.Amongst other pasquinades, there were prints, or pictures, representing her majesty, naked, meager, withered, and wrinkled, with every aggravated circumstance of deformity that could disgrace a female figure, seated in a regal chair; a crown on her head, surrounded with M. R. and A. in capital characters. In the first of these was written, in small letters, Maria, in the second regina, and in the third Anglioe. The additional figures were a great number of Spaniards sucking her. Underneath, in Italian characters, were legends, signifying that the Spaniards had sucked her to skin and bone; as also specifying minutely the money, rings, jewels, and other presents, with which she had secretly gratified her husband Philip. The queen was highly incensed at this insolent and popular piece of ridicule; especially as she suspected some of her own council, who alone were privy to these transactions, and acquainted with her secretsCarte, iii. 331..
With regard to the persecutions of this reign, which occasioned the commission in which Sir Thomas Pope was concerned, relating to the suppression of heretics, we will allow that the queen and her friends had suffered, what they thought the most injurious treatment; and, no doubt, when power returned into their hands, were but too naturally disposed to retaliate in their own way. These oppressions, perhaps injudiciously conducted, prepared the way for popery: just as the severities of Mary, at the succession of Elisabeth made the protestants more violent against the papists. In the reign of Henry the eighth, the monasteries were destroyed, and the wealth of the church, in which it's strength consisted, was dissipated. Three of the abbots, in the course of that transaction, were unjustly put to deathCollier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 164.. Six bishops, amongst which were Mary's favorites, and the great champions of her religion, Bonner and Gardiner, were deprived, insulted, and imprisoned, during the reign of Edward the sixthSee Heylin, Eccles. Rest. sub. ann. 1551.. In the same reign, the queen, while princess, was absolutely forbidden to hear mass; a misfortune, in her ideas, almost equal

to the loss of lifeSee MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 6195. 26. "Mary had rather loss her life than part with the mass.": and her friends who privately interposed to defeat the execution of this dreadful interdiction, were sent to the TowerStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 253. seq..But as no religion can expiate, so no provocation can justify, no resentment can excuse, that uninterrupted series of deliberate barbarity which marks every page of her unprosperous annals with martyrdoms, hardly to be paralleled in the pagan persecutions of primitive christianity. If in the two preceding reigns, many venerable prelates of Mary's communion had been injuriously treated, or even put to death, for conscientious disobedience, yet none of them were inhumanly dragged to the flames like the meek Latimer or the learned Ridley. It is also allowed, that to burn heretics was an established doctrine of the catholic religion. But in what age of the same religion, or in what country, were these punishments ever executed with so many circumstances of cruelty? Her attempt to restore the monasteries, however conformable to her system, was a measure, which tended only to bring back national poverty with national superstition: for

it is certain, that Henry's distribution of the monastic revenues into private hands, although dictated by selfish and fordid motives, founded the present greatness of England. In the mean time it will be but charitable to grant, that her private life was confessedly blameless and unblemished. I will not say whether it was her fault or her unhappiness, that the constancy of her attachments seldom met with suitable returns of gratitude and affection. In this at least some goodness of heart appears, that nothing affected her so much, as the unkindness of those whom she best loved. She possessed a firmness of mind, which deserved better times; and a vigour of understanding, which was impeded by religious prejudices. Her merits, whatever they were, seem to have been overlooked in her misfortunes: and as the latter were aggravated, so the former were obliterated, by that blaze of prosperity which surrounded the succeeding reign.SECT. III.IN the year 1555, the princess Elizabeth, afterwards queen, having been before treated with much insolence and inhumanity, was placed under the care and inspection of sir Thomas PopeFox, edit. 1684. iii. 798. Speed, &c.. Mary cherished that antipathy to the certain heiress of her crown and her successor, which all princes who have no children to succeed naturally feel. But the most powerful cause of Mary's hatred of the princess, with whom she formerly lived in some degree of friendshipStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 14. 17. 82. At queen Mary's coronation, the lady Elizabeth rode in the first chariot, with lady Anne of Cleves, after the queen's litter, in the procession from the tower to Westminster. Strype, ib. 36. See also Hollingsh. Chron. iii. 1152. col. 1., seems to have arisen from Courtney, earl of Devonshire.The person, address, and other engaging accomplishmentsHe was polite, studious, and learned; an accurate master of the languages, skilled in the mathematics, painting, and music. He lived a prisoner in the tower, from fourteen to twenty-six years of age; when he was set at liberty by queen Mary, at her accession. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 339. of this young nobleman, had

made a manifest impression on the queenBurnet, Ref. ii. 255.. Other circumstances also contributed to render him an object of her affection; for he was an Englishman, and nearly allied to the crown; and consequently could not fail of proving acceptable to the nation. The earl was no stranger to these favorable dispositions of the queen towards himGoodwyn, p. 339.. Yet, he seemed rather to attach himself to the princess; whose youth and lively conversation had more prevailing charms than the pomp and power of her sisterBurnet, Ref. ii. 273. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 352, 362.. This preference not only produced a total change in Mary's sentiments which regard to the earl, but forced her openly to declare war against Elizabeth.The ancient quarrel between their mothers remained deeply rooted in the malignant heart of the queenCamden, Eliz. per Hearne, i. Apparatus, pag. 19.: and she took advantage from the declaration made by parliament in favor of Catharine's marriageStatut. Mar. i. cap. i., to represent her sister's birth as illegitimate. Elizabeth's inclination to the protestant religion still further heightened Mary's aversion: it offended her bigottry, disappointed her exspectations,

and disconcerted her politics. These causes of dislike, however, might perhaps have been forgotten by degrees, or, at least, would have ended in secret disgust. But when the queen found that the princess had obstructed her designs in a matter of the most interesting nature; female resentment, founded on female jealousy, and exasperated by pride, could no longer be suppressed.So much more forcible, and of so much more consequence in public affairs, are private feelings, and the secret undiscerned operations of the heart, than the most important political reasons. Monsieur Noailles, however, the French embassador at the court of England during this period, with the true dignity of a mysterious statesman, seems unwilling to refer the queen's displeasure to so slight a motive: and assigns a more profound intrigue as the foundation of Courtenay's disgrace. Domestic incidents operate alike in every station of life; and often form the greatest events of history. Princes have their passions in common with the rest of mankind.Elizabeth being now become the public and avowed object of Mary's aversion, was openly treated with much disrespect and insult. She was forbidden to take place, in the

presence chamber, of the countess of Lenox and the dutchess of Suffolk, as if her legitimacy had been dubiousGoodwyn.. This doctrine had been insinuated by the chancellor Gardiner, in a speech before both houses of parliamentSess. sec. ann. prim. Mar.. Among other arguments enforcing the necessity of Mary's marriage, he particularly insisted on the failure of the royal lineage; artfully remarking, that none of Henry's descendants remained, except the queen, and the princess ElisabethAvoiding the term sister. Amb. de Noailles, apud Carte, iii. 310.. Her friends were neglected or affronted. And while her amiable qualifications every day drew the attention of the young nobility, and rendered her universally popular, the malevolence of the vindictive queen still encreased. The princess therefore thought it most prudent to leave the court: and before the begining of 1554, retired to her house at Ashridge in Hertfordshire"Wherein our most worthie and ever famous queen Elisabeth lodged as in her owne, beinge then a more stately house, at the time of Wyatt's attempte in queen Maryes daye." Norden's Discription of Hartfordshire, written 1596. pag. 12. edit. 1723..In the mean time, Sir Thomas Wyat's rebellion, abovementioned, broke out, in opposition

to the queen's match with Philip of Spain. It was immediately pretended, that the princess Elisabeth, together with lord Courteney, was privately concerned in this dangerous conspiracy, and that she had held a correspondence with the traitor Wyat. AccordinglySee Hollingshed's Chron. iii. 1151. seq. From Fox., sir Edward Hastings, afterwards lord Loughborough, sir Thomas Cornwallis, and sir Richard Southwell, attended by a troop of horse, were ordered to bring her to the court. They found the princess sick, and even confined to her bed, at AshridgeAmb. de Noailles, whose papers are cited by Carte, calls this a favorable illness."Since, he adds, it seems likely to save Mary from the crime of putting her sister to death by violence." Carte, iii. 306.. Notwithstanding, under pretence of the strictness of their commission, they compelled her to rise: and, still continuing very weak and indisposed, she proceeded in the queen's litter by slow journies to LondonHer manner of coming to London is thus described in a manuscript chronicle, often cited hereafter, "The same tyme and daye, between four and fyve of the cloke at night, my lady Elisabeth's grace came to London, through Smithfielde, untoo Westminster, with c. velvet cotts after her grace. And her grace rod in a charytt opyn on both sydes: and her grace [had] ryding after her a 100. in cotts of fyne redde gardyd with velvett; and so through fletstrete unto the court through the quenes garden, hir grace being sycke." MSS. Cotton, Vitell. F. 5.. At the court, they kept her confined and without

company, for a fortnight: after which, bishop Gardiner, who well knew her predominant disposition to cabal and intrigue, with nineteen others of the council, attended to examine her concerning the rebellion of which she was accused. She positively denied the accusation. However they informed her, it was the queen's resolution the should be committed to the Tower, till further enquiries could be madeHollingshead, ut supr.. The princess immediately wrote to the queen, earnestly entreating that she might not be imprisoned in the Tower, and concluding her letter thus: "As for that Traytor Wiat, he might paraventur write me a letter; but on my faith I never receved any from him. And as for the copie of my letter sent to the Frenche king, I pray God confound me eternally, if ever I sent him word, message, token, or letter, by any menesCamden's Eliz. per Hearne, vol i. editor. praefat. p. 78." Her oaths, and her repeated protestations of innocence were all ineffectual. She was conveyed to the tower, and ignominiously conducted through the Traitor's gateMay 18. As MSS. Cott. Vitell. F. 5..At her first commitment, only three men and three women of the queen's servants, were

appointed for her attendants. But even these were forbidden to bring her meat; and she was waited on, for this purpose, by the lieutenant's servants, or even by the common soldiers. But afterwards, two yeomen of her chamber, one of her robes, two of her pantry and ewry, one of her buttery, one of her cellar, another of her larder, and two of her kitchen, were allowed, by permission of the privy council, to serve at her table. No stranger, or visitor, was admitted into her presence. The constable of the tower, sir John Gage, treated her very severely, and watched her with the utmost vigilance. Many of the other prisoners, committed to the same place on account of the rebellion, were often examined about her concern in the conspiracy: and some of them were put to the rack, by way of extorting an accusation. Her innocence however was unquestionable: for although Wyat himself had accused her, in hopes to have saved his own life by means of so base and scandalous an artifice, yet he afterwards denied that she had the least knowledge of his designs; and lest those denials which he made at his examinations might be insidiously suppressed, and his former depositions alledged against her adopted in their stead, he continued to make the same declarations

openly on the scaffold at the time of his executionHollingshead, ut supr.,There was a pretence, much insisted on by Gardiner, that Wyat had conveyed to her a bracelet, in which the whole scheme of the plot was inclosed. But Wyat acquitted her of this and all other suspicionsStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 97.. After a close imprisonment of some days, by the generous intercession of lord Chandois, lieutenant of the tower, it was granted that she might sometimes walk in the queen's lodgingsConcerning these apartments in the Tower, see the very judicious and ingenious Mr. Walpole's Historic Doubts concerning Richard the Third., in the presence of the constable, the lieutenant, and three of the queen's ladies; yet on condition that the windows should be shut. She then was indulged with walking in a little garden, for the sake of fresh air: but all the shutters which looked towards the garden were ordered to be kept close.Such were their jealousies, that a little boy of four years old who had been accustomed every day to bring her flowers, was severely threatened if he came any more; and the child's father was summoned and rebuked by

the constable. But lord Chandois being observed to treat the princess with too much respect, he was not any longer entrusted with the charge of her; and she was committed to the custody of sir Henry Bedingfield, of Oxburgh in NorfolkHe was firmly attached to the queen's interests. Beside his Government of the Tower, he was knight marshal of the queen's army, captain of her guards, vice-chamberlain to the queen, and a privy counsellor. She also granted him a yearly pention of 100 l. for life, and part of the forseited estate of sir Thomas Wyat. Blomefield's Norfolk, iii. 481. He is often, by mistake, written Beningfield, Benfield, &c., a person whom she had never seen nor knew before. He brought with him a new guard of one hundred soldiers, cloathed in blue; which the princess observing, asked with her usual liveliness, If lady Jane's scaffold was yet taken away?About the end of May she was removed from the tower under the command of sir Henry Bedingfield, and lord Williams of Thame, to the royal manor or palace at WoodstockMSS. Cotton. Vitel. F. 5. "The xx daye of May my ladie Elisabeth, the quenes sister, came out of the tower, and toke hir barge at the tower-wharffe and so to Rychmond, and from thens unto Wyndsor, and so to Wodstoke.". The first night of her journey she lay at Richmond; where being watched all night by the soldiers, and all access of her own private attendants utterly prohibited, she

began to be convinced, that orders had been given to put her privately to death. The next day she reached Windsor, where she was lodged in the Dean's house near saint George's collegiate chapel. She then passed to lord Williams's seat at Ricot in Oxfordshire, where she lay; and "was verie princelie entertained both of knights and ladies." But Bedingfield was highly disgusted at this gallant entertainment of his prisoner. During their journey, lord Williams and another gentleman playing at chess, the princess accidentally came in, and told them she must stay to see the game played out; but this liberty Bedingfield would not permitHollingshead, ut supr..Arriving at Woodstock, she was lodged in the gatehouse of the palace; in an apartment remaining complete within these fifty years with it's original arched roof of Irish oak, curiously carved, painted blue sprinkled with gold, and to the last retaining it's name of Queen Elizabeth's chamberThe old royal manor, or palace, at Woodstock, was besieged in the grand rebellion, and much damaged in the siege. The furniture was afterwards sold, and the buildings portioned out by Cromwell, or his agents, to three persons. Two of them, about 1652, pulled down their portions for the sake of the stone. The third suffered his part to stand, which consisted of the gatehouse in which the princess Elizabeth was imprisoned, and some adjoining ruinous buildings. After the rebellion, lord Lovelace turned this gatehouse into a dwelling house, and lived in it for many years. As to its adjoining ruins, persons now living remember standing, a noble porch, and some walls of the hall; the walls and magnificent window; of the chapel; several turrets at proper dista ces; and could trace out many of the apartments. Sir John Vanbrugh, while Blenheim palace was building, had taste enough to lay out 2000 l. in keeping up the ruins. But afterwards lord treasurer Godolphin observed to Sarah, dutchess-dowager of Marlborough, that a pile of ruins in the front of so sine a seat, was an unseemly object, all the old buildings, and amongst the rest, the princess Elizabeth's gatehouse, were entirely demolished and erased. Aubrey, the antiquarian, acquaints us that in the old hall there were two rows of pillars, as in a church; and that the arches were of the zigzag Norman shape. He has left us in his manuscript, Drawings of the windows in the larger apartments, and in the chapel and hall. Aubrey's CHRONOLOGIA ARCHITECTONICA, MSS. in Mus. Ashmol. Oxon. fol. pag. 7. Of fair Rosamond's Bower, which literally signifies no more than a chamber, and which was a kind of pleasure-house on the south-west side of the old palace, some ruinous remains are stil remembered: particularly, an apartment over Rosamond's-well. This well, which is a large, clear, and beautiful spring, paved and fenced about the inside with stone, was undoubtedly a bath, fountain, or reservoir, for the convenience of the Bower, or perhaps of the palace. The author of the history of Allchester, written 1622, tells us, that "the ruins of Rosamond's Bower are still to be seen against the court-gate." Apud Kennet's PAROCH. ANTIQ. p. 694. Henry vii. built much here: particularly the front and principal gate of the palace. On this gate was his name, and an English rhyme, importing that he was the founder. Wake's REX PLATONICUS, edit. Oxon. 1607. pag. 6. 4to. It was a favorite seat of our kings, who all resided here from Henry I. to Charles I. Queen Elisabeth in particular, notwithstanding her imprisonment here, perhaps on that account, was remarkably fond of living at this palace: and she became a considerable benefactress to the town of Woodstock. I have a small etching of a prospect of the Princess Elizabeth's chamber and its adjoining ruins; done, a few years before they were destroyed, in 1714, by J. Whood.. Hollingshead

gives us three lines which she wrote with a diamond on the glass of her window; and

Hentzner, in his itinerary of 1598Edit. Noriberg. 1629. pag. 215., has recorded a sonnet, which she had written with a pencil on her window shutter. In the Bodleian Library at OxfordInter MSS. 242. 12mo. In the same library is a translation by the princess Elizabeth into Latin, of an Italian sermon of Occhini. Calligraphy was a requisite accomplishment of those times, and it is accordingly written, on vellum, with uncommon elegance, in her own hand. It is dedicated in Latin, to her brother king Edward, to whom she sends it as a newyear's gift. The dedication is dated Enfield, December xxx. Bibl. Bodl. Arch. D. 115. 8vo., there is an English Translation of saint Paul's Epistles, printed in the black letter, which the princess used while she was here imprisoned; in a blank leaf of which, the following paragraph, written with her own hand, and in the pedantry of the times, yet remains. "I walke many times into the pleasant fieldes of the holye scriptures; where I plucke up the goodliesome herbs of sentences by pruning, eate them by reading: chawe them by musing: and laie them up at length in the hie

seate of memorie, by gathering them together. That so having tasted the sweetenes, I maye the lesse perceave the bitternesse of this miserable life." The covers are of black silk; on which she had amused hesself with curiously working, or embossing, the following inscriptions and devices in gold twist. On one side, on the border, or edge, CAELUM PATRIA. SCOPUS VITAE XPVS. CHRISTO VIVE. In the middle a heart; and about it, ELEVA COR SURSUM IBI UBI E. C. [i. e. est Christus.] On the other side, on the border, BEATUS QUI DIVITIAS SCRIPTURAE LEGENS VERBA VERTIT IN OPERA. In the middle a star, and about it, VICIT OMNIA PERTINAX VIRTUS E. C. [i. e. Elisabethae Captivae; or, Elisabetha Captiva.] One is pleased to hear these circumstances, trifling and unimportant as they are, which shew us how this great and unfortunate lady, who became afterwards the heroine of the British throne, the favorite of her people, and the terror of the world, contrived to relieve the tedious hours of her pensive and solitary confinement. She had however little opportunity for meditation or amusement. She was closely guarded: yet sometimes suffered to walk into the gardens of the palace. In this situation, says Hollingshead, "no marvell, if

she hearing upon a time out of hir gardin at Woodstocke a certaine milkmaide singing pleasantlie, wished herself to be a milkmaide, as she was; saying that her case was better, and life merrierThis circumstance has given occasion to an elegant ballad by Shenstone.."After being confined here for many months, she procured a permission to write to the queen: but her importunate keeper Bedingfield intruded, and overlooked what she wroteHollingshead ut supr.. At length, king Philip interposed, and begged that she might be removed to the courtWhen she came to the crown, says Hollingshead, she discharged Bedingsield from the court, telling him, that whenever she should happen to have a state-prisoner who required to be "hardlie handled and strictlie kept," she would send for him. Hollingshead, p. 117. col. 2. But there is some reason to suspect, that Fox, from whom Hollingshead transcribes, has aggravated, in his account, sir Henry's usage of the princess. After she was queen, he was very often at court, and her majesty visited him in a progress, 1578. And though she frequently called him her Jaylor, yet this seems rather to have been a term of royal familiarity than of contempt. Though I doubt not that he treated the princess with no great compassion or delicacy; a circumstance which reslects honor on her forgiveness. See Blomesield's Norfolk, iii. 481.. But this sudden kindness of Philip, who thought Elisabeth a much less obnoxious character than his father Charles the fifth had conceived her

to have been, did not arise from any regular principle of real generosity, but partly from an affectation of popularityHe affected to treat the princess with much respect. In an examination, cited by Hollingshead, it appears, that accidenttally passing her in a chamber of the palace, he paid her such obeisance as to fall with one knee to the ground, notwithstanding his usual state and solemnity. Chron. iii. 1160. col. 1.; and partly from a refined sentiment of policy, which made him foresee, that if Elisabeth was put to death, the next lawful heir would be Mary queen of Scots already betrothed to the dauphin of France, whose succession would for ever join the sceptres of England and France, and consequently crush the growing interests of SpainCamden, Eliz. per Hearne, vol. i. Apparatus, pag. 21. However, it is said, that out of gratitude for her preservation, she constantly kept Philip's picture by her bed-side; even to her death, notwithstanding his perfidy after she became queen. Ballard's Mem. of L. ladies, p. 217..In her first day's journey, from the manor of Woodstock to lord Williams's at Ricot, a violent storm of wind happened; insomuch, that her hood and the attire of her head were twice or thrice blown off. On this, she begged to retire to a gentleman's house then at hand: but Bedingfield's absurd and superabundant circumspection refused even this insignificant request; and constrained her, with much indecorum,

to replace her head-dress under a hedge near the road. The next night they came to Mr. Dormer's, at Winge, in Buckinghamshire; and from thence to an inn at Colnebroke, where she lay. At length she arrived at Hampton-court, where the court then resided, but was still kept in the condition of a prisoner. Here bishop Gardiner, with others of the council, frequently persuaded her to make a confession, and submit to the queen's mercy. Dissimulation appears to have been a conspicuous feature in Elisabeth's character. One night, when it was late, the princess was unexpectedly summoned, and conducted by torch light to the queen's bedchamber: where she kneeled down before the queen, declaring herself to be a most faithful and true subject. She even went so far, as to request the queen to send her some catholic treatises, which might confirm her faith, and inculcate doctrines different from those which she had been taught in the writings of the reformers. The queen seemed still to suspect her sincerity: but they parted on good terms. During this critical interview, Philip had concealed himself behind the tapestry, that he might have seasonably interposed, to prevent the violence of the queen's passionate

temper from proceeding to any extremitiesHollingshead ut supr..One week afterwards she was released from the formidable parade of guards and keepersBurnet, Fox, Speed, &c.. A happy change of circumstances ensued; and she was permitted to retire with sir Thomas PopeMaister Gage, who is called the queen's gentleman-usher, or master of the ceremonies, is said by Fox and others, to have been joined with sir Thomas Pope in this appointment. But he seems to have acted only as an assistant or inferior. Probably this was sir Edward Gage, to whom the queen granted in 1556, thirty retainers. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480. Sir John Gage was constable of the tower; and died in 1556. Anstis, Regist. Gart. i. 423. Notes. He [Sir John] was also chancellor of the dutchy of Lancaster. chamberlain of the houshold, and a privy counsellor. Anstis, ibid. to Hatfield-house in Hertfordshire, then a royal palaceThe present noble structure was erected by Robert, first earl of Salisbury, about 1610. James the first exchanged Hatfield, with lord Salisbury, for Theobalds. It orginally belonged to the bishops of Ely, and was built by bishop Morton about 1480. The chapel was consecrated in 115. See Le Neve, Prot. Bish vol. 1, 2. pag. 144. Peacham tells us, that this chapel was adorned with paintings, by Butler, and other eminent artists. GENTLEMAN's EXERCISE, Lib. i. c. 3. "Robert earl of Salisbury, lord high treasurer of England, who as he favoreth all learning and excellencies, so he is a principal patron of this art; having lately imployed M. Butler and many other excellent artists for the beautyfying his houses, especially his chappell at Hatfield." pag. 310. edit. 1661.. At parting the queen began to

shew some symptoms of reconciliation: she recommended to her sir Thomas Pope, as a person with whom the princess was well acquainted, and whose humanity, prudence, and other valuable qualifications were all calculated to render her new situation perfectly agreeableSee Thomas Heywood's ENGLAND's ELIZABETH. Lond. 12mo. 1631. p. 20; and at the same time she presented her with a ring worth seven hundred crownsCatte, iii. 326..But before I proceed further in this part of my narrative, I stop to mention a circumstance unnoticed by our historians: which is, that sir Thomas Pope in conjunction with others, had some concern about the person of the princess Elizabeth, even when she first retired from the court, in disgrace, to her house at Ashridge; and before her troubles commenced, occasioned by Wyat's rebellion; all which I have already related at large. When that rebellion broke out, Mary wrote to the princess then sick at Ashridge, artfully requesting her immediate attendance at the court. Elizabeth's governors at this time, whose names are no where particularly mentioned, waiting every day for her recovery,

very compassionately declared it unsafe yet to remove her. And the princess herself in the mean time, signified by letter her indisposition to the queen; begging that her journey to the court might be deferred for a few days, and protesting her abhorrence of Wyat's seditious practices. Her governors likewise, on their parts, apprehending that this tenderness towards their mistress might be interpreted in a bad sense, dispatched a letter to bishop Gardiner, lord chancellor; acquainting him with her condition, and avowing their readiness to receive the queen's commands. An original draught or copy of this letter in Sir Thomas Pope's own hand, with several corrections and interlineations by the same, is now preseved in the British MuseumBrit. Mus. Bibl. Cotton. MSS. Titus. B. ii. fol. 159. After it, follows the letter from the privy council to sir Thomas Pope, cited below. The paper which contains both is endorsed, "Minute of the lady Elizabeth's Officers to the Queen's counsall." The letter here mentioned in the text, begins thus."It may please your good lordship. That albeit we attende on my ladie Elizabethes grace our mistres, in hope of her amendement to repair towardes the queenes highnes, whereof we have as yet none apparaunt likelyod of helthe; yet consideringe this daungerouse worlde, the perillous attemptes and the naughty endevours of the rebelles, which we dayly here of against the queenes highnes our sovereigne ladie, we do not forgeate our most bounden dewty, nor yet our readynes in worde and dede to serve her highnes by all the waies and meanes that may stande in us, both from her grace our mistres, and of our owne partes also. Which thing although my ladie's grace our said mistres hath tofore this signified unto the queenes highnes, of her behalffe, by message; it might nevertheles seame to your good lordship, and the lordes of the councel, some negligence, that we did not make you also privy herunto. We have therefore thought it our deuties to declare this unto your lordship, &c." The whole is printed in Strype's Mem. Eccl. iii. 83. From MSS. Petyt, Now in the Inner-Temple library. Strype says only, that it was written by the lady Elizabeth's governors; or, "by those that had the care and government of her." Among the princess Elisabeth's domestics or attendants was John Astley, one of Roger Ascham's literary friends, and to whom many of his Latin letters are written. Prefixed to Ascham's very sensible English political tract on the AFFAIRES OF GERMANIE, and addressed to Astley, is an English letter, dated 1553, from Astley to Ascham, in which the latter speaks feelingly of their frequent agreeable conversations on learned subjects at Hatfield-house. Ascham was preceptor to the princess. Sir Thomas Pope, in a fragment of a letter to the president of Trinity-college Oxford, and dated Hatfield, says, that he had procured an Office in the Tower of London for Maister Asteley. Probably this is the same person. Ascham in some of his Epistles complains, that he was unjustly driven from his tuition of Elisabeth, in a consequence of a party formed against him in the family of the princess. My principal reason for mentioning these particulars is to shew, that sir Thomas Pope could not have been one of Ascham's enemies on this occasion; for, had that been the case, it is not very probable that he should promote Ascham's friend. He was husband of Catharine Asteley, the governess of the princess. See below, p. 99. Ascham mentions this Catharine Asteley in very respectable terms, in a Letter to the princess, on the death of her tutor Grindall. "Hunc dolorem, magis apud te renovando augere, quam consolando lenīre vererer, nisi perspecta esset mihi prudentia tua, sic consiliis prudentissimae Feminae dominae Catharinae Astleae munita, &c." EPIST. Lib. ii. p. 95. a. edit. 1581. See also ibid. p. 89. b. This Astely was made master of the Jewel house at queen Elisabeth's accession, with a salary of fifty pounds. Decembr. 23. LIT. PAT. i. Eliz. He wrote a treatise on HORSEMANSHIP, printed without his name, in 1586. 4to. By the way, it appears from what has been said, that the princess before her final settlement at Hatfield under sir Thomas Pope's care, was occasionally shifted about to various royal seats, of which Hatfield was one.: from which circumstance it is manifest that he was at this time one of these

governors or attendants; but in what department or capacity, I know not. However it

is evident that he was removed from this charge, when the princess, notwithstanding her infirm state of health, was hurried up to the court by Southwell, Cornwallis, and Hastings: nor do we find, that from that time he had the least concern with her during her imprisonment in the tower and at Woodstock, and the rest of those undeserved persecutions, which preceded her enlargement and final removal to Hatfield.To this lady sir Thomas Pope behaved with the utmost tenderness and respect: residing with her at Hatfield, rather as an indulgent and affectionate guardian, than as an officious or rigorous governor. Although strict orders were given that the mass alone should be used in he family, yet he connived

at many protestant servants, whom she retained about her personBritish View of the State of the church of England, &c. Written in the year 1608. Lond. 1653. 12mo. p. 45. He adds, that when his mother was dismissed, her own father durst not take her into his house. p. 46.. Yet Sir John Harrington says, that his father, a protestant, was imprisoned in the tower for twelve months, and fined one thousand pounds, for carrying a letter to the princess, and expressing his good wishes for her prosperity: and that, as if the heresy of a maid of honor could do any great harm, his mother, who was one of her favorite attendants, was removed from that situation, as a professed heretic, by the command of bishop GardinerStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 216..Nor was sir Thomas Pope wanting on proper occasions, in studiously shewing her such marks of regard and deference as her station and quality demanded. This appears from the following anecdote, which also marks his characterSee Append Numb. XV..Two of the fellows of Trinity college in Oxford, just founded by him, had violated one of it's strictest statutes, and were accordingly expelled by the president, and Society. Upon 
this they repaired to their founder, then at Hatfield with the princess Elisabeth, humbly petitioning a readmittance into his college. Sir Thomas Pope probably was not a little perplexed on this occasion; for although disposed to forgiveness, yet he was unwilling to be the first who should openly countenance or pardon an infringement of laws which himself had made. But perceiving a happy opportunity of adjusting the difficulty, by paying at the same time a handsome compliment to the princess, with much address he referred the matter to her gracious arbitration; and she was pleased to order, that they should immediately be restored to their fellowships. In consequence of this determination, he wrote the following letter to the President of the college.Maister President, with my hertie commendations,Albeit Sympson and RuddeThe two delinquents. have committed such an offence, as whereby they have justlie deserved, not onlie for ever to be expulsed out of my collegge, but also to be ponished besides in such sort as others myght fere to attempt the like: neverthelesse, at the desier, or rather commandement,

of my ladie Elizabeth her grace; and at my wiffes request, who hath both sent and written to me very ernestlie; and in hope this will be a warnyng for theym to lyve in order hereafter: I am content to remytt this fault, and to dispence with theym towching the same. So always, that they openly in the hall, before all the felowes and scolers of the collegge, confesse their faultes; and besides paye such fyne, as you with others of the collegge shall think meate. Which being don, I will the some be recorded yn some boke; wherein I will have mencion made, that for this faulte they were clene expelled the collegge; and at my ladye Elizabeth her graces desier, and at my wiffes request they were receyved into the house again. Signifying, that if eny shall hereafter commyt the lyke offence, I am fully resolved ther shall no creature living, the quenes maiestie except who maye commaunde me, cause me to dispence withall. Assuring yow, I never dyd eny thing more agaynst my hert, then to remytt this matter: the ponishment whereoff to the extremyte, I beleve wold have don more good, then in this forme to be endyd; as knoweth the holye gost, who kepe you in helth. Written

at hatfelde the xxiith of August, anno 1556.Your own assuredly, THO. POPE.[P.S.] Sir, I requyre you above all thinges, have a speciall regard there be peace and concorde in my colleggeEx autograph. in Thesaur. coll. Trin. Oxon. Superscribed "To his loving friend, Mr. Slythurst, president of Trynitie Collegge in Oxford." And in registr. prim. ejusdem coll. fol. xvi. b..Nor did sir Thomas Pope think it inconsistent with his trust, to gratify the princess on some occasions with the fashionable amusements of the times; even at his own expence, and at the hazard of offending the queen. This we learn from a passage in a curious manuscript chronicleMSS. Cotton. fol. Vitellius. F. 5. Brit. Mus. MSS. Strype. See Append. Numb. XXVIII.. "In Shrovetide, 1556, sir Thomas Pope made for the ladie Elisabeth all at his owne costes, a greate and rich maskinge in the greate halle at Hatfelde; wher the pageaunts were marvellously furnished. There were tha twelve minstrels antickly disguised; with forty-six or more gentlemen and ladies,

many of them knights or nobles, and ladies of honor, apparelled in crimsin sattin, embrothered uppon with wrethes of golde and garnished with bordures of hanging perle. And the devise of a castell of clothe of gold, sett with pomegranates about the battlements, with shields of knights hanging therefrom, and six knights in rich harneis turneyed. At night the cuppboard in the halle was of twelve stages mainlie furnished with garnish of gold and silver vessul, and a banket of seventie dishes, and after a voidee of spices and suttleties with thirty spyse plates, all at the chardgis of sir Thomas Pope. And the next day the play of HOLOPHERNES. But the queen percase mysliked these folliries, as by her letters to sir Thomas Pope hit did appear, and so their disguisinges were ceased."The princess was notwithstanding sometimes suffered to make excursions, partly for pleasure, and partly for paying her compliments at court: and on these occasions she was attended in a manner suitable to her rank. Strype tells us, from the same manuscript journal of memorable occurrences, written

about those timesStrype Eccl. Mem. iii. 444, 445., that on February the twenty-fifth, 1557, "The lady Elizabeth came riding from her house at Hatfield to London, attended with a great companie of lords, and nobles, and gentlemen, unto her place, called Somerset-place beyond Strond-bridge, to do her duty to the queen. And on the twenty-eighth she repaired unto her grace at Whitehall with many lords and ladies." And again, in March, the same year. "Aforenoon the lady Elizabeth's grace took her horse and rode to her palace of Shene; with many lords, knights, ladies, and gentlemen, and a goodly companie of horseStrype Eccl. Mem. iii. 336.". In April the same year, she was escorted from Hatfield to Enfield-chase, by a retinue of twelve ladies clothed in white sattin on ambling palfries, and twenty yeomen in green, all on horse back, that her grace might hunt the hart. At entering the chase, or forest, she was met by fifty archers in scarlet boots and yellow caps, armed with gilded bows; one of whom presented her a silver-headed arrow, winged with peacock's feathers. Sir Thomas Pope had the devising of this show. By way of closing the sport, or rather the ceremony, the princess was gratified

with the privilege of cutting the throat of a buckVitell. F. 5. MSS. Cotton. MSS. Strype ut supr.. In the same month she was visited by the queen at Hatfield: when the great chamber was adorned with a sumptuous suit of tapestry, called the Hanginge of the siege of Antioch, and after supper a play was performed by the choir-boys of Saint Paul'sMSS. Ibid. See HIST. ENG. POETRY. ii. 392..In the summer of the same year, the princess paid a visit to the queen at Richmond. She went by water from Somerset-place in the queen's barge; which was richly hung with garlands of artificial flowers, and covered with a of canopy green sarcenet wrought with branches of eglantine in embroidery, and powdered with blossoms of gold. In the barge she was accompanied by sir Thomas Pope, and four ladies of her chamber. Six boats attended on this procession, filled with her highness's retinue, habited in russet damaske and blue embroidered sattin tasselled and spangled with silver, with bonnets of cloth of silver plumed with green feathers. She was received by the queen in a sumptuous pavilion, made in form of a castle, with cloth of gold and purple velvet, in the labyrinth of the gardens. The walls, or

sides of the pavilion were chequered into compartments, in each of which was alternately a lily in silver and a pomegranate in gold. Here they were entertained at a royal banquet; in which was introduced a sottletieA curious devise in cookery or confectionary. of a pomegranate-tree bearing the arms of Spain. There were many minstrels, but no masking or dancing. Before the banquet, the queen was long in consultation with sir Thomas Pope. In the evening the princess with all her company returned, as they came, to Somerset-place; and the next day retired to HatfieldMSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype, ut supr.. During her residence at Hatfield, the princess was also present at a royal Christmas, kept with great solemnity by the queen and king Philip at Hampton-court. On Christmas-eve, the great hall of the palace was illuminated with a thousand lamps curiously disposed. The princess supped at the same table in the hall with the king and queen, next the cloth of state: and after supper, and served with a perfumed napkin and plates of confects by the lord Paget. But she retired to her ladies, before the revels; masking, and disguisings began. On saint Stephen's day she heard mattins in the queen's closet adjoining to the chapel, where she was

attired in a robe of white sattin, strung all over with large pearls. On the twenty ninth day of December, she sate with their majesties and the nobility at a grand spectacle of justing, when two hundred spears were broken. Half of the combatants were accoutred in the Almaine, and half in the Spanish fashionVitell. F. 5. Cotton. MSS. Strype, ut supr.. Thus our chronicler, who is fond of minute description. But these and other particularities, insignificant as they seem, which he has recorded so carefully, are a vindication of Queen Mary's character in the treatment of her sister: they prove, that the princess, during her residence at Hatfield, lived in splendor and affluence, that she was often admitted to the diversions of the court, and that her present situation was by no means a state of oppression and imprisonment, as it has been represented by most of our historians.We have before seen that sir Thomas Pope, during his attendance on this lady, was engaged in the foundation of his college. An undertaking of such a nature, could not fail of attracting the attention of the young Elisabeth; whose learned education and present situation naturally interested her in the progress of a work so beneficial to the increase

of her favorite pursuits, and carried on by one with whom she was so nearly connected. Accordingly this subject was often matter of conversation between them, as appears from part of a letter written by sir Thomas Pope: which also still further proves the friendly terms on which they lived together. "The princess Elisabeth her grace, whom I serve here, often askyth me about the course I have devysed for my scollers: and that part of myne estatutes respectinge studie I have shewn to her, which she likes well. She is not only gracious, but most lerned, as ye right well knowDat. Hatfield, 1556. To the President. Ex Autograph. ubi supr. Ascham, in one of his Latin Epistles, gives the following interesting account of Elisabeth's progress in literature, when she was very young, under the year 1550. Among the learned daughters of Sir Thomas More, he says, the princess Elisabeth saines like a star of distinguished lustre; deriving greater glory from her virtuous disposition, and literary accomplishments, than from the dignity of her exalted birth. I was her preceptor in Latin and Greek for two years. She was but little more than sixteen, when she could speak French, and Italian, with as much fluency and propriety as her native English. She speaks Latin readily, justly, and even critically. She has often conversed with me in Greek, and with tolerable facility. When she transcribes Greek or Latin, nothing can be more beautiful than her hand-writing. She is excellently skilled in music, although not very fond of it. She has read with me all Cicero, and great part of Livy. It is chiefly from those two authors alone, that she has acquired her knowledge of the Latin langnage. She begins the day with reading a portion of the Greek testament, and then studies some select Orations of Isocrates and the tragedies of Sophocles. From these authors, I was of opinion, that she would adorn her style with the most elegant diction, enrich her mind with the most suitable precepts, and frame her high station of life to every fortune. For her religious instruction, after the Scriptures, she adds to the classics Saint Cyprian and the Common Places of Melancthon, with other writers of that school, who teach purity of doctrine with elegance of expression. In every composition, she is very quick in pointing out a far-fetched word, or affected phrase. She cannot endure those absurd imitators of Erasmus, who mince the whole latin Language into proverbial maxims. She is much pleased with a Latin Oration naturally arising from its subject, and written both chastly and perspicuously. She is most fond of translations not too free, and with that agreeable clash of sentiment which results from a judicious comparison of opposite or contradictory passages. By a diligent attention to these things, her taste is become so refined, and her judgment so penetrating, that there is nothing in Greek, Latin, and English composition, either extravagant or exact, carless or correct, which she does not in the course of reading accurately discern; immediately rejecting the one with disgust, and receiving the other with the highest degree of pleasure. Ascham. EPISTOL. Lib. i. p. 18. a. edit. Lond. 1581.."
While sir Thomas Pope was concerned in this superintendance of the princess, he received a letter from Heath, archbishop of York and lord chancellor, the bishops of Rochester and Ely, lord Arundel, and sir Henry Jernegan, dated July the thirtieth, 1556, by which it appears, that the privy council placed much confidence in his penetration and address, and greatly depended on

his skilful management of her highness at this critical period.In consequence of Wyat's unsuccessfull attempt, new efforts were made to foment a second insurrection. Many of Wyat's adherents, of which the principal was one Dudley Ashton, had fled into France where they were well entertained. Ashton being connected with both kingdoms sent over from France one Cleyberye, a condemned person, who pretended to be the earl of Devonshire. The conspirators at the same time, in the letters and proclamations which they dispersed, made use of the lady Elisabeth's name, and propagated many scandalous insinuations against her reputation and honourStrype Eccl. mem. iii. 336.. They proceeded so far, as at Ipswich to proclaim lord Courteney and the princess, king and queen of EnglandCarte iii. 327.. In how licentious a manner her character was abused, appears from a curious manuscript paper preserved in the British Museum, entitled, "A relation how one Cleber, 1556, proclaimed the ladie Elisabethe quene, and her beloved bedfellow, lord Edwarde Courtneye, kyngeMSS. Harl. 537. 25.." It was thought proper

that the truth of this affair should be made known to the princess; and as the communication of it was a matter of some delicacy, and that misrepresentations might be prevented, the council above-mentioned order sir Thomas Pope, "Because this matter is spread abroad, and that paradventure, many constructions and discourses will be made thereof, we have thought meet to signifie the whole circumstances of the case unto you, to be by you opened to the ladie Elisabeth's grace at such time as ye shall thinke most convenient. To the end it may appear unto her, how little these men stick, by falshood and untruthe, to compass their purpose: not letting, for that intent to abuse the name of her grace, or any others: which their devises nevertheless are (god be thanked) by his goodness discovered from time to time, to their majesties perseverance, and confusion of their enemies. And so we bid you hertily well to fare. From Eltham the xxxth of July, 1556. Your loving friends, &cBurnet Hist Ref. RECORDS. Numb. xxxiii. pag. 314. And Hist. p. 351.."In consequence of sir Thomas Pope's explanation, the queen herself wrote a letter to

the princess, in which she expressed her abhorrence and disbelief of these infamous forgeries. It was answered by the princess, who declared her detestation of the conspirators, and disclaimed the least knowledge of their malicious designs. Undoubtedly having suffered so severely, and perhaps unjustly, in the affair of Wyat, she judged it expedient to clear her character even from the most improbable suspicions. Commissioners were immediately appointed for examining into this conspiracy, sir Francis Englefield the comptroller, sir Edward Waldegrave, sir Henry Jernegan, sir Edward Hastings, and Cordall the queen's sollicitor; and several of the parties were apprehended, and condemned at GuildhallStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 336, 337.. When war was next year proclaimed against France, this secret concurrence of the French court, with the machinations of Dudley Ashton and his accomplices, was expressly specified, amongst other articles in the declarationCamden, Eliz. per Hearne. i. Apparat. pag. 22..Soon afterwards, Eric king of Sweden sent by his ambassador, a message secretly to the princess at Hatfield, with a proposal of marriage. King Philip had just before proposed

to the queen to marry her to the duke of SavoyStrype, Eccl. Mem., iii. 317.; with a view perhaps of retaining the duke who was an able general, in his interests against France, with which Philip was at this time engaged in open hostilities. This proposal of the king of Sweden she wisely rejected, because it was not conveyed to her by the queen's directions. But to this objection the embassador answered, that the king of Sweden his master, as a man of honor and a gentleman, thought it most proper to make the first application to herself: and that having by this preparatory step obtained her consent, he would next, as a king, mention the affair in form to her majesty. But the final answer of princess was an absolute denial: and she desired the messenger to acquaint his master, that as she could not listen to any proposals of that nature, unless made by the queen's advice or authority; so she could not but declare, that if left to her own will, she would always prefer a single condition of life. The affair soon came to the queen's ears; who sending for sir Thomas Pope to court, received from him an entire account of this secret transaction; ordering sir Thomas at the same time to write to the princess, and acquaint her

how much she was satisfied with this prudent and dutiful answer to the king of Sweden's proposition. Sir Thomas Pope very soon afterwards returned to his charge at Hatfield; when the queen commanded him, not only to repeat this approbation of the conduct of the princess relating to the proposed match from Sweden, but to receive from her own mouth the result of her sentiments concerning it; and at the same time to take an opportunity of sounding her affections concerning the duke of Savoy, without mentioning his name. The imperial ambassadors Mountmorency lord of Courieres, and Bouchard, were still in England, waiting for the event of the latter negociationCarte, iii. 307.. For the Emperor Charles the fifthSee Hume, Hist. iii. 386. seq. Ed. 4to. And Dr. Robertson's masterly History of Charles the fifth., who was now become her friend, and had before interested himself in her favor, was anxious, by such an important connection, to form a potent and lasting alliance between the British and Imperial crowns. But I shall insert sir Thomas Pope's letter, written in consequence of this commission, to the queen or council; by which he seems perfectly to have understood Elisabeth's real thoughts and disposition.First after I had declared to her grace, how well the quene's majestie liked of her prudent and honorable answere made to the same messenger; I then opened unto her grace the effects of the sayd messengers credence: which after her grace had hard, I sayd, the queenes highnes had sent me to her grace, not onlie to declare the same, but also to understande how her grace liked the sayd motion. Whereunto after a little pause taken, her grace answered in forme following. Maister Pope, I requyre you, after my most humble commendacions to the quenes majestie, to render untoo the same lyke thankes, that it pleased her highnes of her goodnes, to conceive so well of my answer made to the same messenger; and herwithal, of her princelie consyderation, with such speede to command you by your letters to signyfie the same untoo me: who before remained wonderfullie perplexed, fering that her majestie might mistake the same: for which her goodnes I acknowledg myself bound to honour, serve, love, and obey her highnes, during my liffe. Requyring you also to saye untoo her majestie, that in the king my brothers time, there was offered me a verie honorable marriage or

two: and ambassadors sent to treat with me touching the sameViz. in 1552, the eldest son of the king of Denmark, Heylin, Eccl. Rest. ELIZ. p. 99.; whereupon I made my humble suite untoo his highnes, as some of honour yet livinge can be testimonies, that it would lyke the same to give me leave, with his graces favour, to remayne in that estate I was, which of all others best lyked me or pleased meShe was not however perfectly satisfied with this state, at that time; as appears from many curious anecdotes of her early coquetry with lord Thomas Seymour, high admiral, who married Catharine Parr, widow of Henry viii. Burghley's State Papers, vol. i. by Haynes. p. 96. "From the confession of Thomas Parrye her cofferer. I do remember also she [Catharine Ashley] told me, that the admirall loved her but too well, and had done soo a great while: and that the queen was jealouse on hir and him, insomuche, that one tyme the quene suspecting the often accesse of the admirall to the lady Elizabeth's grace, cam sodenly upon them, when they were all alone, he having her in his armes. From the confession of Catharine Ashley, her waiting women, or governess. She saith at Chelsy he would come many mornyngs into the said lady Elizabeth's chamber, before she were redy, and sometyme before she did rise.—And if she were in hir bed, he wold put open the curteyns, and bid hir good morrow, &c. And one morning he strave to have kissed her in bed.—At Hanworth, in the garden, he wrated with her, and cut her gown in an hundred pieces, being black cothes. An other tyme, at Chelsey, the Lady Elizabeth hearing the pryvie-lock undo, knowyng that he would come in, ran out of hir bed to hir maydens, and then went behynd the curteyn of the bed, &c.—At Seymour-place, . . . he did use a while to come up every mornyng in his nyght-gowne, barelegged in his slippers, where he found commonly the lady Elizabeth up at hir boke.—At Hanworth, the queene told this examinate, that my lord admirall looked in at the galery wyndow, and se my lady Elizabeth cast hir armes about a man's neck. The which heryng, this examinate enquyred for it of my lady's grace, who denyed it weepyng, and bad ax all hir women. Thei all denyed it. And she knew it could not be so, for ther came no man but Gryndall, the lady Elizabeth's scholemaster. Howbeit, thereby this examinate did suspect, that the quene was jelous betwixt them; and did but feyne this, to thentente that this examinate should take more hede, and be, as it were, in watche betwixte hir and my lord admirall. She saith also, that Mr. Ashley, hir husband, hath divers tymes given this examinate warnyng to take hede, for he did fere that the lady Elizabeth did ber some affection to my lord admirall, she semyd to be well plesed therwith, and sometyme she wold blush when he were spoken of." Ibid. p. 99. This was in 1548. Parrye was afterwards made treasurer of her houshold.. And

in good faith, I pray you say untoo her highness, I am even at this present of the same minde, and so intende to continewe with her maiesties favour: and assuringe her highnes, I so well like this estate, as I perswade myselfe ther is not anie kynde of liffe comparable unto it. And as concerning my lyking the sayd mocion made by the sayd messenger, I beseeche you say unto her maiestie, that to my remembraunce I never hard of his master before this tyme; and that I so well lyke both

the message and the messenger, as I shall most humblie pray God upon my knees, that from henceforth I never hear of the one nor the other: assure you, that if it should eftsones repaire unto me, I would forbeare to speak to him. And were there nothing els to move me to mislyke the mocion, other than that his master would attempte the same, without making the queen's maiestie privie therunto, it were cause sufficient.And when her grace had thus ended, I was so bold as of myselfe to say unto her grace, her pardon first requyred, that I thought few or none would beleve, but that her grace could be ryght well contented to marrie, so ther were some honorable marriage offered her by the queen's highnes, or her maiesties assent. Wherunto her grace answered, What I shall do hereafter I knowe not: but I assure you upon my truthe and fidelitie, and as God be mercifull unto me, I am not at this tyme otherways mynded, than I have declared unto you; no, though I were offered the greatest prince in all Europe.—And yet percase the queen's maiestie may conceive

thisIn MSS. Harl. [ut inf.] it is, "this my answer rather, etc." As if it was the speech of the princess continued. rather to proceed of a maidenlie shamefastnes, than upon anie such certaine determination.THOMAS POPEBrit. Mus. MSS. Harl. 444. 7. viz. "The ladye Elizabeth hir graces aunswere made at Hattfield, the xxvi of Aprill 1558, to sir T. Pope knt. being sent from the quenes majestie to understand howe hir grace lyked of the mocyon of marryage, made by the kynge ellect of Swethelandes messenger." fol. 28. See also the same, ibid. MSS. Cotton, Vitell. xii. 16. 8. It is also among Petyt's Manuscripts, now in the Library of the Inner Temple: from whence it is incorrectly printed by Burnet, ubi supr. No. 37. p. 325. See ibid. Hist. p. 361..Courtney earl of Devonshire being now deadHe was imprisoned in Fotheringay-castle, on suspicion of being concerned with the princess Elisabeth in Wyat's rebellion. Being released, he travelled into Italy, and died at Padua, aged thirty. He was the last earl of Devonshire, of the noble family of Courtenay. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 338, 339. Some say he was poisoned., the queen grew less jealous of the princess, and seemed almost perfectly reconciled. In November, 1556, she was invited to court; and accordingly came to London with much parade"The xxviiith daye of November, came ryding thrugh Smythfelde and Old Balee, and thrugh Fleet-street, unto Somersett-plase, my good lade Elisabeth's grace the quenes syster; with a grate company of velvett cotts and chaynes, hir graces gentyllmen: and aftyr, a grate company of her men, all in redd cotts gardyd with a brod gard of blake velvett and cutts, &c." Vitell. MSS. Cott. F. 5. ut supr. Strype cites a part of this passage, Eccl. Mem. iii. 309.. The principal reason

of this invitation, was formally to propose to her in person a marriage with Philibert Emanuel, the duke of Savoy, which sir Thomas Pope, by the queen's commands, had before hinted at a distance, as we have seen in the preceding letter. This proposal the princess declined; but disguised her refusal with the same earnest professions of her unchangeable devotion to a state of virginity, which she had before made to sir Thomas Pope on account of the Swedish match. Great court was paid to the princess during her abode at Somerset-houseCarte, iii. 331.. Her amiable condescension, obliging address, and agreeable conversation, procured her new interests and attachments, and even engaged the best part of the lords of the council in her favor.Her beauty perhaps had no great share in these acquisitions; such as it was, it still retained some traces of sickness, and some shades of melancholy, contracted in her late severe but useful school of affliction.
She found however that retirement best suited her circumstances, as it did her inclinations; and although she had been invited to pass the whole winter in London, after a short stay of one week only, she returned to her former situation at Hatfield"Hir grace did loge at hir plase [Somerset house] till the iii day of Dessember. The third day of Dessember cam ryding from hir plase my ladie Elisabeth's grace from Somerset plase down Fleetstrete, and thrugh Old Bailee and Smythfelde, &c. And so hir grace toke hir waye towards byshopehatfeld plase." MSS. Cott. Vittell. F. 5. ut supr..One should have expected that the queen would have parted in disgust with the princess, at this rejection of a match, recommended by Philip, and so convenient to his purposes. But it appears, that the queen was extremely backward in promoting her husband's desire of marrying Elisabeth to the duke of Savoy. On this account, Philip employed Alphonsus, a franciscan frier, his confessor, to confer with her majesty on the subject of this marriage. She told him, that she feared, without consent of parliament, neither her husband Philip, nor the nation would be benefited by this alliance. She added, that she could not in point of conscience press this match upon her sister;

meaning perhaps that it would be unjust, to force the princess to be married, after her resolute declarations against wedlock; or improper and dishonorable, to match her beneath the dignity of a crowned head. The theological reasonings of Alphonsus were too refined for the understanding, or too weak for the conscience, of the queen, who still remained inflexible in her former opinion. Upon this, Philip wrote to her in his usual authoritative style, advising her to examine her own conscience, and to consider whether her opinion was founded in truth or in obstinacy; adding, that if the parliament opposed his request, he should lay the blame upon herStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 317. seq.. The queen, in her answer, begged that he would, at least, defer the matter till he returned into England: and that then he might have a better opportunity of judging, what attention her reasons deserved. That otherwise, she should live in jealousy of his affections, a state of mind to her worse than death; but which, to her great disquietude, she had already began to feel. She observed, with many expressions of deference to his superior judgment and authority, that, whatever her conscience might have determined, the matter could not be

possibly brought to any speedy conclusion, as the duke would be immediately ordered into the field.This letter which is in French, and printed by StrypeStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. Append. Numb. LVI., is no less a specimen of her implicit submission to Philip, than the whole transaction is, at the same time, an instance of that unconquerable perseverance which the queen exerted on certain occasions. Philip persisted in his design: and with a view to accomplish it more effectually, dispatched into England the duchess of Parma and the duchess of Lorraine, whom he commissioned to bring back with them the princess Elisabeth into Flanders. Philip was in love with the duchess of Lorain; and the splendor of her table and retinue, which she was unable to support of herself, made the queen extremely jealous. She was therefore, whatever her companion might have been, a very improper suitress on this occasion. The queen would not permit the two duchesses to visit the princess at Hatfield; and every moment of their stay gave her infinite uneasiness. But they both soon returned, without successCarte, iii. 338..
Perhaps the growing jealousy of the queen, a passion which often ends in revenge against the beloved object, might at least have some share in dictating this opposition to PhilipPhilip, while abroad, had shewn her so many marks of indifference, and had trifled with her so frequently about his return to England, that once, in a fit of rage, she tore his picture. Carte, ibid. 329.. At length the remonstrances of the queen, and the repeated disapprobation of the princess, prevailed; and it is certain, whatever Mary's real motives might be, that the proposal was suddenly laid aside. But Mary so far concurred with Philip's measures, as the next year to declare war against FranceYet the public finances were at this time so low, that she could not procure a single vote from her privy-council for the declaration of war: and she therefore threatened to dismiss them all from the board, and to appoint counsellors more obsequious. Hume, iii. 391. ed. 4to.; in which the duke of Savoy was Philip's chief commander at the battle and siege of saint QuintinStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 317. Hollingshead, Chron. iii. 1134. col. 1, 2..As to the king of Sweden, he afterwards, in the year 1561, renewed his addresses to Elisabeth, when she was queen of England: at which time, he sent her a royal present of

eighteen large pyed horses, and two ships laden with richesStrype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 271.. At the same time, some stationers of London had published prints of her majesty Elisabeth and the king of Sweden in one piece. This liberty, as it was called, gave great offence to the queen, who ordered secretary Cecil to write to the lord mayor of London, enjoining him diligently to suppress all such publications; as they implied an agreement of marriage between their majesties. Cecil takes occasion to add, "her majestie hitherto cannot be induced, whereof we have cause to sorrow, to allow of any marriadg with any manner of personBurghley's State Papers, by Haynes. p. 367.." Soon afterwards the king of Sweden was expected to pay the queen a visit at Whitehall; and it is diverting to observe the perplexity and embarrassment of the officers of state about the manner of receiving him at court, "the queenes majestie being a maide.Ibid. p. 371.."But she still persisted in those vows of virginity which she had formerly made to sir Thomas Pope at Hatfield; and constantly refused not only this, but other advantageous

matches. One of them was with the Duke D'Alenzon, whom she refused, yet after some deliberation, because he was only a boy of seventeen years of age, and she almost in her fortieth yearCamd. ELIZ. p. 269. per Hearne.. A husband, I suppose, although a young one, would have been at that time perhaps inconsistent with her private attachments; and the formalities of marriage might have laid a restraint on more agreeable gallantries with the earl of Essex and others, BayleDict. Artic. ELIZABETH. assigns a curious physical reason for Elisabeth's obstinate perseverance in a state of virginity.The four last years of queen Mary's reign, which the princess Elisabeth passed at Hatfield with sir Thomas Pope, were by far the most agreeable part of her time during that turbulent period. For although she must have been often disquieted with many secret fears and apprehensions, yet she was here perfectly at liberty, and treated with a regard due to her birth and expectations. In the mean time, to prevent suspicions, she prudently declined interfering in any sort of business, and abandoned herself entirely to

books and amusementsBurnet, Hist. Ref. ubi supr. p. 363.. The pleasures of solitude and retirement were now become habitual to her mind; and she principally employed herself in playing on the lute or virginals, embroidering with gold and silver, reading Greek, and translating Italian. She was now continuing to profess that character which her brother Edward gave her, when he used to call her his sweet sister TemperanceCamd. Eliz. per Hearne, APPARAT. vol. i. p. 14.. But she was soon happily removed to a reign of unparalleled magnificence and prosperity.Upon the accession of the new queen, who was resident at Hatfield when her sister Mary died on November the seventeenth, 1558, it does not appear that sir Thomas Pope was continued in the privy-council. This circumstance may justly be interpreted to his honor. Elisabeth, to prevent an alarm among the partisans of the catholic communion, had prudently retained thirteen of Mary's privy counsellors. These were, Heathe, archbishop of York, and lord chancellor; the marquis of Winchester, lord treasurer; the earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Pembroke, and Derby; the lords Clinton, and Howard; sir Thomas Cheyney, sir William

Petre, sir John Mason, sir Richard Sackville, and Doctor Wootton, dean of York and CanterburyBurnet, Reformat. ii. 375.. But most of these had complied with all the changes which were made in the national religion since the latter end of Henry's reign; and were such dexterous adepts in the fashionable art of adapting their principles to the variable complexion of the times, that they were still employed in every new revolution.SECT. IV.WE have now done with sir Thomas Pope's political character; and are entering on that most memorable circumstance of his life, before incidentally mentioned, by which he secured immortality to his name, and conferred a perpetual emolument on his country; I mean, the foundation of Trinity college in Oxford. His good sense and good disposition led him to reflect, that he could not bestow a competent proportion of those riches which he had so largely received, with greater propriety, utility, and generosity, than in the service of the public. I shall therefore make no apology for delivering at large a history of his proceedings in forming and completing this liberal design.And perhaps there are some of my readers, who will be more pleased to view him in the milder and more amiable light of the father of ingenuous education, dispensing rewards to science and virtue, than in the more active yet turbulent scenes of public life, diversified only

by the vain vicissitudes of human affairs, or fraught with the crimes and misfortunes of mankind.About the year 1290, Richard de Hoton, prior, and the monks, of the cathedral convent of Durham, erected a college in the northern suburbs of Oxford, for the education of the novices of their monastery; to which it was considered as an appendageSee grant in the Appendix, Numb. VI. Which, as it probably contains the first and early separation of the ground on which Trinity college now stands, with its precincts, or of the greatest part of these, to the purposes of learning, was thought too curious to be omitted among the original papers.. This was afterwards increased, with the addition of revenues and books, by Richard of Bury, bishop of Durham, in the year 1345. It was at length entirely rebuilt, more effectually established, and more amply endowed, for eight benedictine monks and eight secular students, in the year 1370, by the munificence of Thomas Hatfield, bishop of the same seeThe monks were allowed annually ten pounds each, and the seculars five mars. It is remarkable, that the stipend of these monks is treble to most of the fellowships then in Oxford.. About the year 1541, this college was dissolved by Henry the eighthSee Stevens's Monast. vol. i. p. 343. from MSS. A. Wood.: at which time, all its estates, its site, precinct, chapel, bellfry, buildings of all sorts,

with the entire appurtenances of the same, were granted by the king to his new dean and chapter of Durham cathedral, which, as I presume, they now possessSee Append. Numb. *VII*.. Its site only reverted to the crown; for Edward the sixth, in the seventh year of his reign, by letters patent dated February the fourth, 1552See Append. Numb. VIII., granted the site of this college to George Owen, of Godstowe, the king's physician, and William Martyn, gentleman.On this ground sir Thomas Pope determined to found his intended college. Accordingly, by indenture, dated February the twentieth, 1554See Append. Numb. IX., he purchased the premises of the said Owen and Martyn. In the same year he obtained from Philip and Mary a royal licence, or charter, dated March the eigthth, 1554See Append. Numb. X., empowering him to create and erect a certain college within the university of Oxford, consisting of one president a priest, twelve fellows, four of whom should be priests, and eight scholarsThis Number he afterwards encreased to twelve.: and liberally and sufficiently to endow the same and their successors with certain manors, lands, and revenues. In the same

charter, and with the estates and possessions therein recited, he likewise obtains licence of the king and queen to found and endow a school at Hokenorton in the county of Oxford, to be called Jesus Scolehouse; and to give statutes as well to the college, as to the first and second masters of the said school"Ac eciam ulterius damus et concedimus eidem Thomae Pope, militi, plenariam facultatem et auctoritatem condendi et sanciendi, pro bono regimine dictorum COLLEGII et SCOLAE, ac terrarum, tenementorum, hereditamentorum, bonorum et catallorum, eorundem, quecunque statuta, ordinationes, et regulas, per dictos, Presidentem Socios et Scholares, Archididascalum, Hypodidascalum, et eorum quemlibet, observanda, &c." EX CHART. ut supr.. On the twentyeighth day of March, 1555, by deed so datedSee Append. Numb. XI., he declares his actual erection and establishment of the said college: and consigns the site and place above-mentioned, to Thomas Slythurste, S.T.B. President: Stephen Markes, A.M. Robert Newton, John Barwyke, James Bell, Roger Crispin, John Richardson, Thomas Scotte, George Sympson, Bachelors of Arts, Fellows: And John Arden, John Comporte, John Perte, and John Langsterre, Scholars. In the morals, learning, and studious diligence of all which persons, he therein declares that he much confides.

Reserving to himself, at the same time, the right of nominating the remainder.With this deed the founder himself, the same day, came to Oxford; and in consequence of it, in his own person delivered possession of the college to the said President, Fellows, and Scholars, in the presence of John Warner, vice-chancellor of the university, warden of All Souls college, and archdeacon of Cleveland, and of ElyHe was also or had been, professor of Physic in Oxford, and prebendary of Winchester and Salisbury. He died Dean of Winchester. A small History of All Souls college occurs in his hand-writing, about the year 1560, in Cod. MSS. Rawlins. 236. fol. Bibl. Bodl.; Owen Oglethorp, president of Magdalene, and dean of WindsorAfterwards bishop of Carlisle: in which character he crowned queen Elizabeth.; Robert Morwent, president of Corpus Christi; Walter Wryght, archdeacon of Oxford; John Browne, canon of WindsorSee Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. F. p. 65. edit 2.; Edmund Powel, esquireOf Sandford, near Oxford., Edward Love, John Bylling, Simon Perrot, John Heywood, Henry Bryan, Arthur Yeldard, John Myleward, John Edmundes, John Beresford, Ralph Dodmer, John Lawrence, Bartholomew Plott, Humfrey

EdmundesIndorsed on the instrument cited Append. Numb. XI., gentlemen, and many othersMany of these persons occur in different parts of these memoirs; and their characters, and connections with sir Thomas Pope, are explained in their proper places.. In consequence of this last-mentioned deed, by an instrument dated the same day and year, Thomas Slythurste appoints Stephen Markes and Robert Newton, his lawful attornies, to enter, in his name and stead, into a certain messuage or building, with its appurtenances, in Oxford, called Trinity college, of the foundation of sir Thomas Pope, knight; and of the same to take full and peaceable possession; and to keep and retain it for the uses and purposes of the said Thomas Slvthurste, according to the force, form, and effect, of a certain grant made to him and others by the said sir Thomas PopeSee Append. Numb. XII..In May following, the founder furnished his college with necessaries and implements of every kindEx indent. dat. Maii 5. ii. iii. Phil. Mar. In Thesauriar. et Registr. prim. Coll. fol. 5.. To the library in particular he gave no inconsiderable collection of valuable and costly books, both printed and manuscriptIbid.. But above all, he adorned the

chapel, as appears by a deed dated the fifth of May, 1555See Append. Numb. XVI., with silver vessels, embroidered vestments, copes of tissue, crosses, and illuminated missalsThe altars of the chapel were dedicated the following year, as appears from the following entry, in Comp. Burff. 1556, anno primo Coll. "Sol. pro Obsoniis datis Dom. Episcopo Glocestrensi et Ministris ejus in consecratione altarium, xviij s. x d. ob.". The next year, he transmitted to the society a body of statutes, dated the first of May, 1556. On the eighth of the same month, he gave them one hundred pounds for a stock to begin withEx acquietantia in Registro primo, fol. 6. b.. Matters being thus duely prepared and adjusted, and his endowmentSee an instrument signed with his own hand, viz. "A Valewe of all the Manors, Londes, Tenements, and Hereditamentes, which I Sir Thomas Pope, Knighte, Founder of Trinitie colledge within the Universitie of Oxford, have given to the Presidente, Fellowes, and Schollers, of the same, and to their Successors for ever. As well at the first Erection of the colledge, as hereafter followithe, &c." Ad. Calc. vet. Libri Statutor. in pergamen. penes Praesid. fol. 109. b. etc. of the college consisting of manors, lands, and impropriations, having effectually taken place before or upon the feast of the annunciation, 1556Comput. Burss. anno primo Coll.; the first president, fellows, and scholars, nominated by himself, were formally and actually

admitted within the chapel, on the thirtieth day of May, being the eve of Trinity Sunday, the same year, yiz. 1556. They were all, the graduates at least, taken from different colleges in Oxford; except one, who was of Cambridge. Their names, dignities, colleges, degrees, counties, and appointments in the new society, as far as notices have occurred, are here specifiedSee Append. Numb. XIII..PRESIDENT.Thomas Slythurste, S.T.B. Canon of Windsor. County, Berkshire.FELLOWS.Arthur Yeldarde, Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, in Cambridge, A.M. Northumberland.—Appointed philosophy-lecturer by the founder.Stephen Markes, Fellow, and Rector, of Exeter College, in Oxford, A.M. Cornwall.—Appointed vice-president by the founder.John Barwyke, of Magdalen College, in Oxford, A.M. Devonshire.—Appointed dean by election.James Bell, Scholar of Corpus Christi College, in Oxford, A.B. Somersetshire.—Appointed rhetoric-lecturer by election.John Richardson, Scholar of Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Cumberland.—Appointed bursar by election.George Sympson, Scholar of Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Cumberland.George Rudde, Scholar of Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Westmoreland.Thomas Scotte, Scholar of Queen's College, in Oxford, A.B. Cumberland.Roger Cryspin, Fellow of Exeter College, in Oxford, A.B. Devonshire.Roger Evens, A.B. Cornwall.John Perte, A.B. Warwickshire.—Appointed bursar by election.Robert Bellamie, of Exeter College, in Oxford, A.B. Yorkshire.SCHOLARS.John Langsterre, of Brasen-Nose College, in Oxford, A.B. Yorkshire.Reginald Braye, A.B. Bedfordshire.John Arden, or Arderne, Oxfordshire.John Comporte, Middlesex.Robert Thraske, Somersetshire.William Saltmarshe, Yorkshire.John Harrys, Gloucestershire.— — —One Starkie was also nominated; but he not appearing, Edmund Hutchins, the founder's nephew, was admitted in his room by the founder's mandate, Octob. 3. Registr. Coll. prim. fol. 3. b. And Registr. Kettell. citat. apud Append. Numb. XXV..On saint Swithin's day, being the fifteenth of July, in the same year, the founder paid a visit to his college. He was accompanied by the bishops of Winchester and Ely, and other eminent personages. He dismounted from his horse at the college gate, where he was received by the president, who stood at his stirrup. At entering the gates he was saluted in a long and dutiful oration by the vice-president: after which the bursars offered him a present of embroidered gloves. From thence he was conducted with the rest of the company into the president's great chamber: the fellows and scholars standing on either side, as he passed along the court. Having viewed the library and Grove, they proceeded to dinner in the hall, where a sumptuous entertainment was provided. The president sate on the left hand of the founder,

yet at some distance, and the rest of the guests, and the society, were placed according to their rank, and in their proper order. There were twelve minstrels present in the hall; and among other articles of provision on this occasion, four fat does, and six gallons of Muscadel, are mentioned. The whole expence of the feast amounting to xijl. xiijs. ixd. After dinner they went to evening mass in the chapel, where the president celebrated the service, habited in the richest cope: and the founder offered at the altar a purse full of angels. They then retired to the Bursary; where the founder paid into the hands of the Bursars all the costs incurred by this visit: and gave them besides, at the same time, a silver goblet gilt, which being filled with hypocrasse, he drank to the Bursars, and to all the company present. He then departed towards Windsor: but before he left the college, gave with his own hands, to each of the scholars, one marcSee Append. Numb. XXIX..In November following, I find a letter to the president from the founder; in which, as likewise in eighteen others written afterwardsFourteen of these letters are the originals in his own hand, preserved in the treasury of the college. The rest are copies in the first register.,

 are many marks of his attention to the affairs and economy of his college, and of his sollicitude about settling every article of the new foundation in the most effectual manner: as also of his readiness to assist on all necessary occasions. In the letter just mentioned, among several other particulars, he tells the president, in consequence of a conversation which had lately passed between them both at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire, by what expedient certain extraordinary expences of the college, in the late visitationConcerning which I find the following entries, in Comp. Burss. 1556. "EXPENSAE EQUITANTIUM.—Sol. per dum. Perte in equitando ad fundatorem primo. ijs. ijd.—Sol. dom. Bellamie equitanti ad Mag. Love [the founder's receiver] ut certiorem cum redderet de adventu visitatorum, et pro expensis propriis. xjd.—Sol. pro obsoniis, aliisque rebus, pro visitatcribus reverendissimi Cardi alis Pole. xxivs. ixd. Sol. in regardo ministris visitatorum. xxvs."—For an account of this visitation, see Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon Lib. i. p. 278. col. ii. The visitors were Brookes bishop of Glocester, Cole dean of Saint Paul's, Morwent president of Corpus, Wright archdeacon of Oxford, and Ormanet the pope's datary. Their design was to restore the pope's authority in the university, and to eject all students who were disaffected to the catholic ceremonies. The visitation seems to have ended in burning a considerable number of English bibles, and in removing the body of Peter Martyr's heretical wife from the cathedral of Christchurce. of

the university by the deputies of cardinal Pole, and in some other instances, should be discharged. He commissions him to thank master Rawes, a canon of WindsorHe lies buried under the fourth arch of the south ile, on the choir side, of St. George's chapel, at Windsor, with a plate of brass on his grave, much injured; having the figure of a priest in a canon's mantle, with St. George's arms on his left shoulder, with this inscription.Orate pro anima Magistri Thomae Rawes hujus sacri collegii Canonici, qui obiit xii. die Maii anno dni millesimo quingentesimo quinquagesimo sexto. Cujus anime propicietur deus. Amen.In Rymer's FOED. Tom. xv. p. 463. is queen Mary's grant of his canonry to Richard Brewarne, canon of the first stall of Christ Church, Oxford, dated May 24, 1557, in which instrument he is called "nuper defunctus." According to Frithe's Catalogue of canons of Windsor, in Ashmole's Berkshire, vol. iii. p. 260. he was also vicar of Wantage, Co. Berks. His books, consisting of near fifty volumes in folio, came to the college in 1557. He was of Oxford, where he occurs determining in Arts, 1518. Wood MSS. Ashmol. E. 6., for a present of books intended for the library. He desires the president would bargain for him with master FreereWilliam Freer, of the city of Oxford, whose father Edward married Anne the daughter of John Bustarde, second husband of the founder's mother. Lee's MSS. Visitation, ut supr. pag. 24. I find one Thomas Freer, admitted Probat. Soc. of Trin. coll. Jun. ix. 1560. Dioces. Lond.—Registr. coll. prim. I find also the following article, in Comp. Burss. 1561.—2."Sol. xxvii. Novemb. pro expens. Dni Freer perferentis collegii literas et librum statutorum ad episcopum Wynton, vij.s. viijd.He was afterwards M.D. and gave to the college-library, in 1566, a beautiful and valuable MS. on vellum, in solio, of Gregory Nazianzen. Edward Freer, above-mentioned, was buried in the church of All Saints Oxon. Jan. 27, 1564. Registr. Parcchial. eccles. praedict., for one thousand load of stone, to

be carried to the college for beginning a wall round the Grove. He talks of having moved my lord cardinal Pole's grace, for licence for three of the fellows to preach"Concerning Lycence for Mr. Markes, Mr. Yeldard, and Mr. Barwyke, to preach, I have already moved my lord Cardinall's grace;; who answered the bushop might give lycence: but understonding syns by Mr. Yeldard the contrary, I shall eftsones move his grace therein." Queen Mary, Aug. 29, 1555, commissioned Gardiner bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor, to grant Licences for preaching. Rym. Foed. xv. 337. See form of a licence for this purpose in Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. RECORDS, Numb. 78. pag. 82.: a matter concerning which very rigid injunctions had been published, at the restoration of the catholic religion by queen Mary. He mentions having sent to the college, for the service of the chapel, two pair of censers of one fashion, two cruets, two candlesticks for the high altar, one ship, and one pax of ivory: "trusting, or it be longe, ye shall have the lyke thynges of sylver." He adds, and forasmoch as it is evill carriage of my organes this wynter, Mr. WhiteSir Thomas Whyte, who at this time was engaged in founding St. John's college. I find him entertained at Trinity college more than once, viz. in Comp. Burff. Coll. Trin. 1562.—3."Sol. ex bellariis insumptis in Fundatorem Collegii sancti Johannis, iiijs. ixd." And again the same year, "In datis Fundatori Collegii sancti Johannis cum viseret collegium."The two founders seem to have been intimately acquainted and connected; as appears not only from this, but from another passage, in the letter before us. "Mr. [Sir] Thomas White and I ar almost at a point with sir John Master for his woode; and I believe shall conclude for the same within this ii. or iii. dayes.", at my

request, is content you shall have [keep] his littell organs till the beginning of somerAccordingly, his own being received, sir Thomas Whyte's organ was returned to St. John's college, as appears from Comp. Burff. coll. Trin. 1556.—7. viz.
"Sol. pro organorum ad Collegium sancti Johannis vectura, iiijd.", when I may convey myne to you without hurtyng them. And bycause ye write, ye have grete nede of a standing cup to drynke wyne in; Mr. Sowtherne'sSee an account of him, Append. Numb. XIII. Notes. money shall be bestowed in ii. standing cuppes gilt with covers, or ells in one faire stonding cupp with a cover, and ii. sylver saltes with a cover; and if they come to more money, I will pay the same myself. Ye shall receive by master Yeldard a rentall of all such londes as I have given your college; which, till I appoint more scollers, as, god suffering I intend shortely, is a iust proportion to bear all the charges of your

colledge. And thus beseeching you with my hertie commendacions to all the fellowers and scollers of my college, desiring the same to remember me with their prayers, I bid you farewell. Wrytten at Clerkynwell the xxviith of November, 1556.Your assured loving friend, THOMAS POPEEx autograph..From other letters, written to the president, it appears that during his life-time he paid all the university expences of degrees, regencies and determinations, for the fellows and scholarsI find him paying, at once, to Proceeders of his college, perhaps for the whole year, the sum of vjl. xiijs. ivd. From letter, dat. St. Thomas's day, at Tyttenhanger, without the year..On the twentieth of January 1557, he sent to the college for the second timeSee Append. Numb. XVII., and again on the twelfth of April following for the third timeSee Append. Numb. XVIII., various articles of costly furniture for the chapel and hall, consisting of rich copes, service books, &c. as before; and several pieces of silver plate. The whole quantity of plate which he gave them at

these three several times, is as follows. A standing cup of silver gilt, with a cover, embossed with pomegrantesThe Pomegranate first became an ornament on silver plate, particularly on silver embossed standing cups, in the reign of Henry vii. It was in compliment to prince Arthur who matched with Spain. Among the badges on his tomb in Worcester Cathedral, Pomegranates are introduced with his father's portcullis and fleur de lis. In the reign of Henry viii. who married Catharine of Spain, Arthur's widow, they were often used as an ornament in the furniture of masques and pageants, exhibited for the entertainment, and in honor, of the queen. See Hollingshed, Chron. iii. 802, 807, 808, 839, &c. Hence they became also a decoration in architecture; as in the turrets of the great gate of Christ Church, at Oxford, built by Wolsey. They were again revived, and grew very fashionable, in the reign of queen Mary, after her marriage with Philip of Spain., and a sheaf of arrows, weighing thirty-three ounces. Two gilt saltes, weighing thirty-nine ounces. Three cups of silver gilt, weighing more than thirty-one ounces. Twelve silver spoons beside one before sent, parcel-gilt, with knobs of sculpture. These were for the hall. For the chapel they received, two cruets of silver gilt, weighing nine ounces. An holy-water-stop and aspergoire of silver parcel-gilt, weighing more than eighteen ounces. A sacring bell of silver gilt, weighing five ounces. A pax of silver gilt, with a crucifix, and the images of Mary and John, weighing near seventeen ounces. Two pair of censers, for frankincense,

of silver parcel-gilt, weighing seventy ounces. A ship of silver with a spoon for frankinsence, parcel-gilt, weighing near eighteen ounces. Two chapel-basons of silver parcel-gilt weighing more than thirty seven ounces. A fair cross of silver gilt, with images of Mary and John, garnished with chrystal and precious stones, with a foot of silver gilt, weighing together, beside the chrystal and stones, twenty-four pounds and five ounces. Two candlesticks of silver, for the high altar, parcel-gilt, weighing near thirty-two ounces. A monstrans of silver gilt, weighing twenty-one ounces. A patin with a chalice of silver gilt, weighing twenty ounces. Another patin with a chalice of silver parcelgilt, weighing thirteen ounces. A pipe of silver parcel-gilt, weighing thirteen ounces. He gave them besides, by his last will, several other pieces of plate, for the service of the hall, which I shall enumerate hereafter.In September, 1557, he made considerable additions to the foundation; on the tenth of which month, he conveyedWith a condition of exchange: and he afterwards exchanged them for possessions of greater value in Essex and Gloucestershire, 1558. ADDITAM. ut infr. fol. 115., or rather confirmed to the Society the manors of Dunthorp

and Seawell in Oxfordshire. With these new revenues he ordains and endows five obits, or dirges, yearly to be sung and celebrated as festivals, in his college"ADDITAMENTUM ex liberalitate dom. Thome Pope, Fundatoris collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis, in universitate Oxon. post erectionem dicti collegii; tam pro augendo numero scholarium, quam pro aliis rebus in eodem peragendis.""Cum, haud multum post collegii mei erectionem, ingente tum et insolita rerum omnium caritate et penuria, misere ubique saeviente; Ego de exequiis et hujusmodi aliis rebus statuendis, quae oblivione in initio erant praetermissae, nonnulla praeterea alumnis meis perquam necessaria deesse adhuc viderem: Perpetuam ejusdem collegii mei perdurationem conservationemque in omnibus ex animo cupiens atque volens, precedenti Beneficio meo hoc insuper addidi, &c."—"Dat. in Aedibus meis Clarkenwell, Septemb. 10. 1557." ADDITAM. ad calc. libri Statutorum. fol. 97. Notwithstanding, he had before thought of many of these particulars. They were not, however, till now, fully and effectually established.. These are, for queen Mary and her most noble progenitors, on the day of the assumption of the holy virgin; for dame Margaret his late wife, and Alice his daughter, deceased, on the day of the conception of the holy virgin; for dame Elizabeth his present wife, on the day of the nativity of the holy virgin; and for William and Margaret, his father and mother, on the day of the annunciation of the holy virgin. And on Jesus day, the seventh of August, he appoints an

Obit or dirgeBy deed dat. Decemb. xxiv, 1 Eliz. 1558, he likewise founded a dirge on the same day, in the church of Much-Waltham in Essex; for which he gave a pension of xxvjs. viijd. to Bryan Needham, vicar of Much-Waltham, and to his successors, "That the said Bryan Nedeham, and his successoures, shall yerly for ever, upon the feast day of Jesus in the monthe of August, say, or cause to be said, one Dirige; and the next day following one Masse, for the sowle of sir Thomas Pope, and all cristen sowles: And after the said masse fynished, that then the said Bryan Nedeham, and his successoures, shall ymmediatelie gyve unto fyve poore folkes, which shall be present at the said Dirige and Masse, to pray for the sowle of the said sir T. Pope, and all cristen sowles to euerie of them, four-pence."—"Sig. S. and D. in the Pr. of John Bersford, and John Milward." In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon. I find the said Bryan Needham supplicating for the degree of M.A. at Oxford in the year 1556. Registr. I. Congreg. et Convoc. fol. 169. a. fol. 160. b. In Turri Scholarum., annually to be celebrated, as well during his life, as after his decease, for himself and all christian souls. At which time, during his dirge and mass, he orders that twelve poor men and twelve poor women shall be present in the chapel, and afterwards receive each a competent allowance of money, bread, and drink, within the college at the entrance into the hall: and after the mass of his obsequie was sungRegistr. Coll. ut supr. fol. 14. seq., that bread and drink be annually distributed the same day among the poor prisoners in Oxford. From the same revenues he likewise grants a

weekly allowance to the said prisoners; with various other improvements, and augmentations of former appointments. And because he once intended to found a School at Hokenorton in Oxfordshire; with the endowment intended for that purpose, he now founds from these lands, four additional scholars in his college: By which judicious alteration of his original plan, the number of the scholars was increased to twelve, and equalled to that of the fellows. He tells us that he rejected the scheme of founding a school"Cum ante annos aliquot decreveram, unam perpetuam ac liberam SCHOLAM apud Hokenorton, in com. Oxon. erigere et stabilire; ejusque rei Licentia, quemadmodum et fundandi mei collegii, ab illustriss. Phil. et Mar. &c. mihi facta sit.—Atque a gravissimis prudentissimisque hominibus, Reipublicae me consultius facturum sit indicatum, si numerum scholarium Oxoniae jam multum diminutum, ac indies magis magisque deficientem, augerem ac restaurarem, quam si hujusmodi Scholarum multiplicarem numerum; praesertim cum constet in oppidis illi loco vicinis, varias Scholas, easque doctis ornatas instructoribus, ob discipulorum accedentium paucitatem, non fatis frequentatas. Illorum rationibus atque confilio ductus, &c." EX ADDITAMENTO, ut supr. He first intended to found this school at Dedington, his native town. For an account of it, see Append. No. XIV. as an appendage to the college, being persuaded that it would prove more beneficial to the public, to restore in some measure, and encrease the number of scholars in the university of Oxford, of late much diminished and still continuing to decay,

than to multiply the number of grammar schools; especially as those situated in the neighbourhood of the place abovementioned, although properly filled with learned masters, were so little frequented and encouraged.In December, the same yearIndent. dat. Dec. 1. 1557. Registr. prim. fol. 16. b. And Append. XXIII. XXIV., he declares his intention of building a commodious edifice at Garsington near Oxford, to which the society might retire in time of pestilence, then no uncommon malady. For this purpose, in case he should not accomplish it in his life-time, as he intended, he left by his will five hundred marks, and the building, consisting of a fair quadrangle of stone, was accordingly raised after his deathSee articles of his will, infr. Great part of it has been demolished, as useless. One range, or side, of the building now remains; containing an arched entrance, with many large apartments having arched windows, and the kitchen at one end with a spacious fire place as in our colleges. It was not completely finished till 1570. Ex comp. Burss. 1570.—1..When sir Thomas Pope had founded his college, the university of Oxford complimented him with their letters of thanks and acknowledgment, in consideration of his having

added a new college to the former number; which were delivered to the founder by the presidentThe letter was accompanied with a present of rich gloves, viz. Ex comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1556.—"Sol. per dom. Bellamie pro deferendis LITERIS et CHIROTHECIS ab universitate ad praesidem pro Fundatore. ijs. xjd."—The president, I suppose, was then in London, waiting for this purpose. Bellamie is one of the fellows. See Append. Numb. XXV. Article, BELLAMIE. In a Computus of Dr. W. Tresham, commissary of the university in the aforesaid year, I find the following article, viz. "Here folowith other charges which I William Tresham as commissarie have leyde out for the universitie of Oxford sithence the xxiitie day of April an. dni 1556.—ITEM for gloves sent to sir THOMAS POPE, and my lady his wife, with letters of thankesgiving from the universitie, vjs. viijd." Among the auditors of this computus are Thomas White, Walter Wryght, Thomas Slythurst, and Robert Morwent. Ex orig. in Bibl. Bodl. Codd. MSS. A. Wood.. Indeed they had no small reason, at this time, to acknowledge with pleasure and gratitude this accession to their constitution. Heylin very justly remarks, that queen Mary, in rebuilding the public schools at Oxford "gave encouragement to two worthy gentlemen to add two new colleges to the former, Trinity and saint John's. Had it not been for these Foundations, there had been nothing in this reign to have made it memorable, but only the misfortunes and calamities of itEccles. Restaurat. Hist. of Q. Mary. p. 84.." He might have added, that this liberality

could not have been conferred at a more seasonable time on the university. And of this sir Thomas Pope was very sensible, as we have before seen, when he substituted an additional number of academical students in the place of a grammar-school.But that it may further appear, how much these encouragements were now wanted, it will be necessry to look backwards upon the state of learning in England, particularly at Oxford; and from thence to trace its progress, and the causes of its decline, down to the times with which we are concerned. An enquiry not less instructive than entertaining, and naturally connected with the present subject.About the close of the fifteenth century, a taste for polite letters, under the patronage of the popes, began to be revived in Italy. But these liberal pontiffs did not consider at the same time that they were undermining the papal interest, and bringing on the Reformation. This event is commonly called the Restoration of Learning; but it should rather be styled the restoration of good sense and useful knowledge. Learning there had been before, but barbarism still remained. The

most acute efforts of human wit and penetration had been exerted for some centuries, in the dissertations of logicians and theologists; yet Europe still remained in a state of superstition and ignorance. What philosophy could not perform, was reserved to be completed by classical literature, by the poets and orators of Greece and Rome, who alone could enlarge the mind, and polish the manners. Taste and propriety, and a rectitude of thinking and judging, derived from these sources, gave a new turn to the general system of study: mankind was civilized, and religion was reformed. The effects of this happy revolution by degrees reached England.We find at Oxford, in the latter end of the fifteenth century, that the university was filled with the jargon and disputes of the Scotists and Thomists; and if at that time there were any scholars of better note, these were chiefly the followers of Wicliffe, and were consequently discountenanced and persecuted. The latin style then only known in the university, was the technical language of the schoolmen, of casuists, and metaphysicians. At Cambridge, about 1485, nothing was taught but Alexander's Parva Logicalia, the trite axioms of Aristotle, which were never rationally explained, and the profound

questions of John ScotusErasm. Epist. H. Bovillo. dat. Roffae. 1516.. At length some of our countrymen, the principal of which were Grocyn, Latymer, Lillye, Linacer, Tunstall, Pace, and sir Thomas More, ventured to break through the narrow bounds of scholastic erudition, and went over into Italy with a design of acquiring a knowledge in the Greek and Latin languages.Leland. ENCOM. pag. 74. edit. 4to. 1589. viz. 
Omnes Italiam petierunt sydere fausto,Et nituit Latiis terra Britanna Scholis.. The Greek, in particular, was taught there with much perfection and purity, by many learned Greeks who had been driven from Constantinople. In 1488, Grocyn and Linacer left Oxford, and studied Greek at Florence under the instruction of Demetrius Chalcondylas, and Politian; and at Rome under Hermolaus BarbarusWood Ath. Oxon. i. 15, 19, 20. See Stapleton de tribus THOMIS. cap. i.. Grocyn returned an accomplished master in the Greek, and became the first lecturer of that language at Oxford, but without any settled endowmentWood. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 246.. Elegance of style began now to be cultivated, and the study of the most approved antient writers became fashionable.
In 1496, Alcock bishop of Ely, founded Jesus college in Cambridge, partly for a certain number of scholars to be educated in grammarSee Lit. Pat. Hen. vii. quod Johannes Episcopus Eliens. fundare possit quoddam collegium de uno magistro, et sex sociis, et certo numero scholarium in Grammatica erudiendorum. Rymer. Foed. xii. 633. and Knight's Life of Colet, p. 19.. Degrees in grammar, or rhetoric, had been early established at Oxford. But the pupils of this class studied only systems of grammar and rhetoric, filled with empty definitions and unnecessary distinctions, instead of the real modelsWalter de Merton, in the statutes of Merton college at Oxford, appoints a grammarian in that society. "Sit etiam in ipsa congregatione grammaticus unus, qui studio grammaticae totaliter vacet.—Et eorum qui studio grammaticae fuerint applicati curam habeat: et ad ipsum etiam provectiores in dubiis suae facultatis sine rubore habeant regressum, &c." Statut. coll. Mert. cap. ii. These statutes were given in August, A.D. 1274.. In 1509, Lillye, the famous grammarian, who have learned Greek at Rhodes, and afterwards improved himself in latin at Rome under Johanes Sulpitius and Pomponius Sabinus, was the first teacher of greek at any public School in England. This was at saint Paul's school in London then newly established, and of which Lillye was the first MasterKnight's Life of Colet, p. 19.. And that ancient prejudices

were subsiding apace, and a national taste for critical studies and the graces of composition began to be diffused, appears from this circumstance alone; that from the year 1502, to the reformation, within the space of thirty years, there were more grammar schools founded and endowed in England than had been for three hundred years beforeKnight ubi supr. p. 100.. Near twenty grammar schools were instituted within this period; before which most of your youth were educated at the monasteriesIt is not to be doubted, that William of Wykeham's ample foundation at Winchester, formed on a plan perfectly original, and that of Henry vi. at Eton, its transcript, were very conducive, although distant, instruments in preparing and facilitating this great work. And indeed long before the period at which we began, William of Wainflete, sensible of the expediency of grammar learning, had founded two considerable schools.—John Leland, or Leilont, taught grammar in Peckwater-inn at Oxford, of which he was principal, about the reign of Henry vi. He wrote a Grammar, which I have seen, in the black letter, entitled GRAMMATICA NOVA. Prefixed are some recommendatory epigrams "Carmeliani poctae." One of these is entitled "In reverendum dominum Gulielmum episcopun Wintoniensem." That is, William of Waynflete. It is closed with this distich: 
Hoc opus auctor enim, te persuadente, JoannesEdidit, &c.Whence it appears that John Leland, the author, wrote this Grammar by the advice and encouragement of William of Waynflete; probably while the latter was master of Winchester school, as Leland died in the year 1428..
In 1517, that wise prelate and bountiful patron, Richard Fox, founded his collegeStatut. C. C. C. Oxon. dat. Jun. xx, 1517. Cap. xx. fol. 51. Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Laud. I. 56. at Oxford, in which he constituted, with competent salaries, two lectures for the latin and greek languagesBeside a third in theology.. This was a new and noble departure from the narrow plan of academical educationIt is not however to be forgotten here, that at the foundation of Christ's college in Cambridge a lecturer was established, who, together with logic and philosophy, is ordered to read "vel ex poetarum vel oratorum operibus." Cap. xxxvii. These statutes were given in the year 1506. In the statutes of King's at Cambridge, and New college at Oxford, both much more antient, an instructor is appointed by the general name of Informater only, who taught all the learning then in vogue., The course of the latin lecturer was not confined to the college, but open to the students of Oxford in general. He is expressly directed to drive barbarism from the new college"Lector seu professor artium humaniorum . . . barbariem e nostro alveario extirpet.". And at the same time it is to be remarked, that Fox does not appoint a philosophy-lecturer in his college, as had been the practice in most of the previous foundations; perhaps thinking, that such an institution would not have coincided

with his new system of doctrine, and that it would be encouraging that species of science which had hitherto blinded mens understandings, and kept them so long in ignorance of more useful knowledge. The greek lecturer is ordered to explain the best greek classics; and those which the judicious founder, who seems to have consulted the most capital scholars of his age, prescribes on this occasion, are the purest, and such as are most esteemed at this day.These happy beginnings were seconded by the munificence of cardinal Wolsed. About the year 1519, he founded a public chair at Oxford for rhetoric and humanity; and soon afterwards another for the greek tongue: endowing both with ample stipendsWood Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 245, 246.. But these innovations in the plan of study were greatly discouraged and opposed by the scholastic bigots, who called the greek language heresy. Even bishop Fox when he founded the greek lecture above-mentioned, was obliged to cover his excellent institution under the venerable mantle of the authority of the church, lest she should seem to countenance a dangerous novelty. For he gives it as a reason, or rather as an apology, for this new

lectureship, that the sacred canons had commanded, that a knowledge of the greek tongue should not be wanting in public seminaries of education"Quem praeterea in nostro alveario collocavimus, quod sacrosancti canones commodissime pro bonis literis et imprimis christianis instituerunt ac jusserunt, eum in hac universitate Oxon. perinde ac paucis aliis celeberrimis gymnasiis, nunquam desyderari. Nec tamen eos hac ratione excusatos volumus, qui Graecam lectionem in ea suis impensis sustentare bebent." Statut. C. C. C. ut supr. By these sacri canones he means a decree of the council of Vienne; which enjoined that professors of Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic should be instituted in the universities of Oxford, Paris, Bononia, Salamanca, and the court of Rome. Gregory Typhernas, one of the learned greek fugitives, about the year 1472, offered to teach greek in the university of Paris, and asked a stipend for his labour, under this canon. Naud. apud Hod. de Graec. illustr. lib. ii c. 3. pag. 234. See also Hod. ibid. pag. 233.. The university of Oxford was rent into factions on account of these attempts; and the defenders of the new erudition, from disputations, often proceeded to blows with the rigid champions of the schools. But these animosities were soon pacified by the persuasion and example of Erasmus, who was about this time a student in saint Mary's college at Oxford, opposite to New-InnWood Hist. Antiq univ. Oxon. i. 237.. At Cambridge however, which, in imitation of Oxford, had adopted greek, Erasmus found greater difficulties. He tells us himself that at Cambridge he read the

greek grammar of Chrysoloras to the bare wallsEpist. cxxiii. Ammonio dat. 1511. tom. iii. p. 140. Opp.: and that having translated Lucian's dialogue called Icaro-menippus, he could find no person in the university able to transcribe the greek with the latinEpist. cxxxix. dat. 1512. Ibid. p. 120.. His edition of the greek testament was entirely proscribed there; and a decree was issued in one of the most considerable colleges, ordering that if any of the society was detected in bringing that impious and fantastic book into the college, he should be severely finedEpist. cxlviii. H. Bovillo. dat. 1513. Ibid. p. 126.. One Henry Standish, a doctor in divinity and a mendicant frier, afterwards bishop of saint Asaph, was a vehement opponent of Erasmus in this heretical literature; calling him in a declamation, by way of reproach, Graeculus iste, which afterwards became a synonymous term for an hereticKnight's Life of Colet. p. 14. See Erasm. Op. tom. ix. 1440..But neither was Oxford, and for the same reasons, entirely free from these contracted notions. In 1519, a preacher at saint Mary's church harangued with much violence against these pernicious teachers, and his arguments occasioned no small ferment among the students.

But Henry the eighth, who was luckily a patron of these improvements, being then resident at the neighbouring royal manor of Woodstock, and having received a just state of the case from Pace and More, immediately transmitted his royal mandate to the university, ordering that these studies shoud not only be permitted but encouragedErasm. epist. ccclxxx. ut inf.. Soon afterwards one of the king's chaplains preaching at court, took an opportunity to censure the new, but genuine, interpretations of scripture which the grecian learning had introduced. The king, when the sermon was ended, which he heard with a smile of contempt, ordered a solemn disputation to be held, in the presence of himself; at which the preacher opposed, and sir Thomas More defended, the use and excellence of the greek tongue. The divine, instead of answering to the purpose, fell upon his knees, and begged pardon for having given any offence in the pulpit. After some little altercation, the preacher, by way of a decent submission, declared that he was now better reconciled to the greek tongue, because it was derived, from the hebrew. The king, amazed at his ignorance, dismissed him, with a charge that he should never again presume to preach

at courtErasm. epist. P. Mosellano. dat. 1519. ccclxxx. pag. 408. tom. iii.. In the grammar-schools established in all the new cathedral foundations of this king, a master was appointed with a competent skill not only in the latin, but likewise in the greek language"Statuimus praeterea, ut per Decanum, &c. unu [Ardididas] eligatur, latine et Gre doctus, boae famae, &c." Statut. eccles. cathedr. Roffens. cap. xxv. They were given Jun 30, 1545. In the same statute, the second master is required to be only Latine doctus. It is remarkable, that cardinal Wolsey does not order greek to be taught in his school at Ipswich, founded 1528. See Strype's Eccl. Mem. i. Append. xxxv. pag. 94. seq.. This was an uncommon qualification in a schoolmaster.At length ancient absurdities universally gave way to these encouragements: and at Oxford in particular, these united efforts for establishing a new system of rational and manly learning were finally consummated in the magnificent foundation of Wolsey's college, to which all the Learned of Europe were invited.But these auspicious improvements in the state of learning did not continue long. A change of the national religion soon happened,

and disputes with the Lutherans ensued, which embroiling the minds of learned men in difference of opinion, disunited their endeavours in the cause of literature, and diverted their attention to other enquiries.Many of the abuses in civil society are attended with some advantages. In the beginnings of reformation, the loss of these advantages is always felt very sensibly; while the benefit resulting from the change, is the slow effect of time, and not immediately percieved or enjoyed. Scarce any institution can be imagined less favorable to the interests of mankind than the monastic. Yet a great temporary check given to the progress of literature at this period, was the dissolution of the monasteries. For although these seminaries were in general the nurseries of illiterate indolence, and undoubtedly deserved to be destroyed, yet the still contained invitations and opportunities to studious leisure and literary pursuits. On this important event therefore, a visible revolution and decline in the state of learning succeeded. Most of the youth of the kingdom betook themselves to mechanical or other illiberal employments, the profession of letters being now supposed to be without support and reward.

By the abolition of the religious houses, many towns and their adjacent villages were utterly deprived of their only means of instruction. What was taught in the monasteries was perhaps of no great importance, but still it served to keep up a certain degree of necessary knowledge. Hence provincial ignorance became almost universally established.Nor should we forget, that several of the abbots were persons of public spirit: by their connection with parliament, they became acquainted with the world; and knowing where and how to chuse proper objects, and having no other use for the superfluity of their vast revenues, encouraged, in their respective circles, many learned young men.It is generally thought, that the reformation of religion, the most happy and important event of modern times, was immediately succeeded by a flourishing state of learning. But this, in England at least, was by no means the case; and for a long time afterwards an effect quite contrary was produced. Yet, in 1535, the king's visitors ordered lectures in humanity to be founded in those societies at Oxford where they were yet wanting: and

these injunctions were so warmly seconded and approved by the scholars in the largest colleges, that they seized on the venerable volumes of Duns Scotus, and other irrefragable logicians, and tearing them in pieces, dispersed them in great triumph about their quadrangles, or gave them away as useless lumberSee Dr. Layton's Letter to Cromwell. Strype's Eccl. Mem. i. 210.. The king himself also established some public lectures, with large endowmentsWood. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 261. col. 1. ii. 36. col. 2.. Notwithstanding, the number of students at Oxford daily decreased: insomuch that, in 1546, there were only ten inceptors in arts, and three in jurisprudence and theologyWood. ibid. sub. anno..In the mean time, the greek language flourished at Cambridge, under the instruction of Cheke and SmythStrype's Lives of Cheke and Smyth.; notwithstanding the unreasonable interposition of their chancellor, bishop Gardiner, about pronunciation. But Cheke being soon called up to court, both universities seem to have been reduced

to the same deplorable condition of indigence and illiteracyRoger Ascham acquaints us, that about this time, the doctrines of Original Sin and Predestination were much canvassed at Cambridge. But he laments, that in these enqui they followed Pigb, whom yet he much commends, rather than saint Austin. Asch. Epistol. lib. ii..During the reign of Edward the sixth, whose minority, which promised many virtues, was abused by corrupt counsellors and rapacious courtiers, little attention was paid to the support of literature. Learning was not the fashion of the times: and being discouraged or despised by the rich who were perpetually grasping at its rewards, was neglected by those of moderate fortunes. Avarice and zeal were at once gratified in robbing the clergy of their revenues, and in reducing the church to its primitive apostolical state of purity and povertySee Collins's Eccl. Hist. Records, 67. pag. 80.. A favorite nobleman of the court held the deanery and treasurership of a cathedral, with some of its best canonries: while his son enjoyed an annual income of three hundred pounds from the lands of a bishoprickBurnet, Ref. P. ii. 8.. In every robbery of the church, the interests of learning suffered. Exhibitions and pensions were substracted

from the students in the universitiesSee Wood ibid. sub. ann. 1550. seq. See also a letter to secr. Cecyl. dat. 1552. In Strype's Life of Cranmer, Append. Numb. xciii. p. 220.. At Oxford the public schools were neglected by the professors and scholars, and allotted to the lowest purposes"In scholis artium pannos exsiccabant mulierculae lotrices." Wood, ibid. p. 273. col. 2.. All academical degrees were abrogated as antichristianCatal. MSS. totius Angliae. sol. edit. 1697. In Hist. Bibl. Bodl. ibid. Praef.. The spiritual reformers of those enlightened days proceeded so far, as to strip the public library, established and enriched by that noble patron Humphrey duke of Gloucester, of all its books and manuscripts; to pillage the archives, and disannul the privileges of the universityWood, ut supr.. From these measures many of the colleges were in a short time entirely deserted.His successor, queen Mary, took pains to restore the splendor of the university of Oxford. Unamiable as the was in her temper and conduct, and inflexibly bigotted to the glaring absurdities of catholic superstition, she protected, at least by liberal donations, the interests of learning. She not only contributed

large sums for rebuilding the public schools, but moreover granted the university three considerable impropriations. In her charter reciting these benefactions, she declares it to be her determined resolution, to employ her royal munificence in reviving its ancient lustre and discipline, and recovering its privileges. These privileges she reestablished with the addition of fresh immunitiesSee Wood, ut supr. i. 274. 278. ii. 17. 426. She gave also to Trinity college in Cambridge, where she rebuilt the chapel, ccclxxvjl. per annum. Fuller Hist. Cambr. p. 122. l'arker's Scel. Cant. ed. Hearne, p. 245. And to Christ-Church, Oxon lxxivl. viijs. ivd. per annum. Strype Ann. Ref. iv. 243. Willis, Cathedr. Oxford. pag. 429.Sanders flourishes on this subject, in his usual declamatory strain. "Ita ergo academia, et reliqua respublica, ab hercseos faecibus, quantum tam brevi potuit, spatio, purgati, restituuntur et ornantur passim ecclesiae, alta ia eriguntur et consecrantur, COLLEGIA NOVA amplissima dote fundantur, coenobia. . . . reaedificantur." De Schism. Angel. edit. Col. Agrippin. 1628. lib. ii. pag. 246. It is true, that she refounded, or founded anew, some considerable monasteries: reestablished saint Patrick's cathedral in Dublin, the bishoprick of Durham, and the hospital of the Savoy. She restored to the clergy the first-fruits and tenths, impropriations, and many estates alienated from diverse episcopal sees. Burnet, Ref. ii. 340. Collier. Eccl. Hist. ii. 398. Biogr. Brit. artic. Basnet. Strype's Grindal, p. 158. Willis's Cathedrals, Durham. Stat. 2. 3. Phil. Mar. cap. iv. Ashmole's Berks. ii. 426. Heylin, &c.: and for these good offices the university decreed for her, and her husband Philip,

an anniversary commemorationWood, ut supr. i. 278. col. 2.. I need not recall to the reader's memory, that sir Thomas Pope, and sir Thomas Whyte, were still more important benefactors by their respective foundations. Without all these favors, although they did not perhaps produce an immediate improvement, the university would still have continued to decay: and they were at least a balance, at that time, on the side of learning, against the pernicious effects of returning popery.In the beginning of the reign of Elisabeth, which soon followed, when protestantism might have been expected to produce a speedy change for the better, puritanism began to prevail, and for some time continued to retard the progress of ingenuous and useful knowledge. The English reformed clergy, who during the persecutions of queen Mary had fled into Germany, now returned in great numbers'; and in consideration of their sufferings and learning, many of them were preferred to eminent stations in the church. They brought back with them those narrow principles about church-government and ceremonies, which they had imbibed, and which did well enough, in the petty states and republics

abroad, where they lived like a society of philosophers; but which were inconsistent with the genius of a more extended church, established in a great and magnificent nation, and requiring a settled system of policy, and the observance of external institutions. However, they were judged proper instruments to be employed at the head of ecclesiastical affairs, by way of making the reformation at once effectual. But unluckily this measure, specious as it appeared at first, tended to draw the church into the contrary extreme. In the mean time their reluctance or absolute refusal to conform, in many instances, to the established ceremonies, and their speculative theology, tore the church into violent divisions, and occasioned endless absurd disputes, unfavorable to the progress of real learning, and productive of an illiterate clergy, at least unskilled in liberal and manly science.In fact, even the common ecclesiastical preferments had been so much diminished by the seizure and alienation of impropriations, in the late depredations of the church, which were not yet ended, that few persons were regularly bred to the church, or, in other words, received a learned education. Hence almost any that offered themselves,

were without distinction admitted to the sacred function. Insomuch, that in 1560, an injunction was directed to the bishop of London from his metropolitan, ordering him to forbear ordaining any more artificers, and other unlearned persons who had exercised secular occupationsStrype's Life of Grindal. b. i. ch. 4. pag. 40.. But as the evil was unavoidable, this caution took but little effect. About the year 1563, there were only two divines, the dean of Christ Church, and the president of Magdalene college, who were capable of preaching the public sermons at OxfordWood, ut supr. i. 285.. Many proofs have been mentioned of the extreme ignorance of our clergy at this time: to which I shall add one, which is curious and new. In 1570, Horne bishop of Winchester enjoined the Minor canons of his cathedral to get by memory, every week, one chapter of saint Paul's epistles in latin: and this task, beneath the abilities of an ordinary school-boy, was actually repeated by some of them, before the bishop, dean, and prebendaries, at a public episcopal visitation of that churchRegistr. Horne, Episcop. Winton. sol. 80. b..The taste for latin composition, and it was fashionable both to write and speak in that

language, was much worse than in the reign of Henry the eighth, when juster models were studied. One is surprized to find the learned archbishop Grindal, in the statutes of a school which he founded and amply endowed, prescribing such strange classics as Palingenius, Sedulius, and Prudentius, to be taught in the new seminaryStrype's Life of Grindal. B. ii. ch. 17. pag. 312. This was A.D. 1583.. Much has been said about the passion for reading Greek which prevailed in this reign. But this affectation was confined to the queen, and a few others: and here it went no farther than ostentation and pedantry. It was by no means the national study; nor do we find that it improved the taste, or influenced the writings, of that age. But I am wandering beyond the bounds which I first prescribed to this necessary digression.Yet I must add an observation or two. In government, many shocks must happen before the constitution is perfected. In like manner, it was late in the reign of Elisabeth, before learning, after its sinews had been relaxed by frequent changes and commotions, recovered its proper tone, and rose with new vigor, under the genial influence of the

protestant religion. And it may be further remarked, that, as all novelties are pursued to excess, and the most beneficial improvements often introduce new inconveniencies, so this influx of polite literature destroyed philosophy. On this account, sir Henry Savile, in the reign of James the first, established professors at Oxford for astronomy and geometry; because, as he declares in the preamble of his statutes, mathematical studies had been totally deserted, and were then almost unknown in, EnglandSee Rym. Foed. xvii. 217. It is observable, that he entirely interdicted the teaching of judicial astrology to his professor of Astronomy. Statut. Savil. cap. ii. These statutes are dated Aug. 11. 1619.. Logic indeed remained; but that science was still cultivated, as being the basis of polemical theology, and a necessary instrument for conducting our controversies against the church of Rome.SECT. V.IN the year 1556, sir Thomas Pope having now finished the foundation of his college, made his last WillRegistr. Cheyney, qu. 10. 86. In cur. Praerogat. Cant., which is dated the sixth of February the same year, he being then no more than forty-seven years of age. Of the several bequests and appointments contained therein, and in the codicil annexed dated the twelfth of December 1558, I shall insert a summaryThe probate is dated May vi. 1559. About three month after his death. Before Dr. Walter Haddon, keeper of the spiritualities and commissary, in the vacancy of the arch. bishoprick..He desires to be buried in the church of saint Stephen's Walbrook, London, in the tomb, or vault, in which his first wife dame Margaret, and his daughter, were interred. His funeral to be without pomp, "or herse of wax," and only two tapers of virgin wax with branches, to burn on his hearse, in the church of the parish in which he shall happen to die, for the space of one week.
He gives "blacke cootes or gownes," to all his executors, his retainers, his household servants; and all such of his overseers, friends, and kindred, as shall happen to be in his house at the time of his decease.He bequeaths xxl. or more to be distributed in alms to the Poor, in general, at his burial: and at the same time, xls. besides, to twenty poor men, and as many poor women, in parricular, with "a gowne of good mantill fryse each:" and when his obsequies were finished, vl. more at least, to be distributed in alms. He gives also xxs. to a discreet preacher for two funeral sermons: one to be preached in the church of the parish in which he shall die; and the other in the church of saint Stephen's Wallbrook, at the time of his interment.To the prisons of Newgate, Ludgate, Counter of Bread-street, Poultry-Counter, the Fleet, King's Bench, Marshalsea, New Counter in Southwark, Gate-house, saint Alban's, and Hertford, xviijl. To be given within one month after his death.
To several of his kindred ccccccclxxxiijl. vs. and xl. marksAmongst others, he leaves to the children of William Hyde, of Denchworth, co. Berks, xxl. He is buried in the church of Denchworth; where on a brass-plate it is said, that he and his wife Margery had xxx children. He was related to sir T. Pope, by means of Hyde marrying into Yate of Berks. This I chiefly mention, to confirm what is said above, pag. 2. concerning the family of sir Thomas Pope's mother. See Ashmole's Berks. iii. 322. There is another William Hyde, who died 1567, with Alice his wife, buried in the same church. They had ten children.. Beside certain smaller bequests to some others.To his cousin Jane Hankes one new gilt standing cup of silver, with a cover, weighing twenty-five ounces. To his son in law John Basford, or Beresford, the third part of all his"My harneys." armour "and artillerieThat is Bows and arrows, and perhaps cross bows, lances, guns, &c. See Ascham's TOXOPHIL. f. 19. a. edit 1571. But the word ARTILLERY, that is Ars telaria, as appears from many other passages in Ascham, was originally and properly restrained to the Bow and Arrow. Compare Engl. Bibl. i. SAM. xx. 38. 40. And Maundrell's TRAVELS, p. 19. Sund. Mar. 7. See also Du Cange, GL. Lat. V. ARTILLARIA. edit. 1733.," his best gauntlets and target, and his best horse.To Mr. Thomas Abrydge, "his stele saddill gilte, and all the harnes of crymsyn

velvett belonging to the same." To mistress Staveley, his mother in law, and to three others of his kindred, each, a fair new cup, or bowl, of silver, weighing each twenty ounces. To his son in law, John Dodmer, fifty angels to make him a chain; and his mother's picture in the bracelet of gold, "which I ware about my arme, and the ring of gold hanging at the same; which bracelett was the first tokyn that ever his mother gave me."To nine of his servants by name, lviijl. xiijs. ivd. Beside gratuities to all the rest of his servants, of every sort, living in his house at the time of his deceaseTo many of them, vl. To others, vjl. xiijs. iiijd. To None, less than xls.. Praying his executors, that if his wife should not find it convenient to retain them after his death, they would help the said servants to some worshipful man's serviceBut he permits all his servants to remain, and to be maintained, in his house, for one quarter of a year after his death; in which time they may provide themselves with other services..To Trinity college in Oxford, by him founded, cl. for building a wall round the Grove of the said college.
To the said college five hundred marcs for building at Garsington near OxfordHe repeats this charge to his wife at the end of his Will. "I beseech my good wife most hartely, that in case I do not in my life make a Howse for my Scolers of my College to repare thereto at Garsington in sicknes tyme, that she will in as convenyent spede, &c.", a house to accommodate the said college, in time of the plague at Oxford; in case he should not live to accomplish the same: And then charging his wife, if the said sum should not be found sufficient, as he believes and intends it to be, fully to supply the defect.To the said college, beside those which he before gave for the service of the hall, the following pieces of silver plate, viz. Three goblets gilt, weighing together threescore and three ounces. Six plain cups gilt, each with one handle, weighing together seventyseven ounces and an half. Three other goblets parcel gilt, with covers, weighing sixty ounces. Thirteen spoons, one completely gilt, weighing together forty ounces and an half. All the foregoing to be new made. He likewise bequeathes to the said college, the largest of his standing cups with a cover, completely gilt, weighing twentythree ounces and a half. Also one of his

basons and ewers parcel-gilt, weighing threescore and fifteen ouncesThey were received May 25, 1564. Ex acquietant. in Regist. prim. fol. 22..To the Nuns of the convent of Syon vl. To the Friers Observants in the chapel of the Holy Cross at Greenwich, vl. To the Black Friers at London, vl.To saint Bartholomew's hospital in West-Smithfield, ccl. To be bestowed in constructing a conduit for conveying water to the said hospital. Otherwise, to be expended in purchasing an estate of xl. per annum, for providing coats, shirts, and gowns, for the sick and poor at their first reception into the house"For such as from tyme to tyme shall enter into the said hospitall, being diseased and wanting the same things at their entre.".To the repair of the church of Clerkenwell, London, xll. To Wallbrook church for opening the vault therein for his sepulture, xxs. To the vicar of Clerkenwell church, xs. And to the vicar of Ridge in Hertfordshire, xs.
To John HeywardSee Append. Numb. IX. In the Notes., his "trewe frynd," one of his gowns of silk. To Mr. Croke, his old master's son, his gown of black sattin faced with luserne spotsHe is painted in such a gown by Hans Holbein. At Trinity college, there are five portraits of him, all of the same dimensions, dress, and attitude. A sixth, a most high-finished old portrait, was lately given by the college to the picture gallery at Oxford, instead of another now in the library. One of these six, and the oldest, came to the college 1596. Ex Comp. Anni. Another is mentioned as hanging in the chapel 1634. Ex Comp. Anni. One of all these which is now in the Hall, was painted by Francis Potter, a curious mechanic and mathematician, and a member of the college, about 1637. Another, mentioned above, was painted in 1665, at the expence of the college, for the picture gallery. This is now in the college library. Another lately purchased, a copy of Holbein, the painter unknown, is in the Bursary. There is a seventh at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire. They are all supposed to be copies from a valuable picture by Hans Holbein, in the possession of lord Guildford at Wroxton. It is not, however, quite improbable that Holbein might have painted some of the supposed copies.—Sir Thomas Pope sate to Hans Holbein, for his picture, in the chamber within the gallery gate-house at Whitehall, designed by Hans Holbein, and lately demolished. Hans Holbein painted many of his pictures in this chamber, which was used by king Henry the eighth as a study or library. To lord Vaulx, cl. To sir Nicholas Shirley, ll. in abatement of cccll. owed, and payable at Midsummer next. Beside debts forgiven to some of his poor relations.
To Mr. Gerrard, the queen's attorney general, one ring of fine gold. To Thomas Slythurste, clerk, president of Trinity college aforesaid, one ring of fine gold. Another to Sir Arthur Darcy, knight. Each ring to weigh one ounce, with the initials of his name on one side, and a Death's head on the other.To the children of several poor tradesmen and others, xxxl. and five marcs.Of this his last will and testament, he constitutes his wife Elisabeth, his most true and assured friend Nicholas Bacon, esquire, afterwards sir Nicholas, and his wife's brother, William Blunt, esquire, Executors. He also appoints his most trusty, worshipful and loving friends, sir Thomas Cornewallys, knight, comptroller of the king's and queen's houshold, sir Francis Englefield, knight, sir Edward Waldegrave, knight, sir Richard Southwell, knight, sir Robert Southwell, knight, William Cordall, esquire, sollicitor general to the king and queen, Richard Goodryck, esquire, John Wyseman, esquire, and Antony Wayte, gentleman, overseers of the same. To each of the said overseers he gives a ring of gold, of the fashion of those

before-mentioned. To Nicholas Bacon, one of his executors, he gives his whistle, shaped like a dragonHe is painted by Hans Holbein with a whistle hanging to his chain, shaped like a mermaid., and set with stones, which he commonly wore at his chainJohn de Veer, earl of Oxford, by Will dat. Apr. 10, 1508, devises his "chain with the whistell, having six score and one links, weighing xcviii ounces, to be sold." Registr. FETTYPLACE, Cur. Praer. qu. 11.—Sir Edw. Howard by will, dat. 1512, bequeathes to "sir Charles Brandon the roope of bowed nobles that he wore his great whistle by, and to the kings grace his greate whistle." Ibid. qu. 18. About the year 1519, Hall mentions the earl of Surrey "on a great coursir richely trapped, and a greate whistle of gold set with stones and perle, hanging at a great and massy chayne baudrick-wise." Hall's CHRONICLES, p. 65. a. The curious Mr. Anstis endeavours to prove, by these and other instances, that the Whistle was the badge, or emblem, of admirals. ORDER of the Garter, ii. 121. But it is certain, from the passage in the text, and other places, that it was often indiscriminately used. It was perhaps even a common ornament. Robert Arderne, a gentleman of Oxfordshire, bequeathes his best whistle, silver and gilt: and his second whistle, silver and gilt. Aug. xx. 1593. Registr. Cur. Cancell. Oxon. G G. fol. 203.. To his other executor, William Blount, he gives xl angels, to make him a chainHe heartily desires the said executors, and overseers, "not to waye my simple gifts any other than as a remembrance of my unfayned good will and disposition towards theym in my lyfe tyme." He at first had bequeathed to each of the Overseers "a fair jugge of silver," to be new made, weighing xxiv ounces: With a death's head in a roundell, and the initials of his name, graven on the covers. But this bequest was afterwards altered in the codicil, as in the text..
To Elisabeth his wife, and Executrix, whom he declares ever to have found, honest, true, faithful, loving, and obedient, he bequeathes the residue of his moveable goods, leases and debts: praying her heartily that she would bestow part of the same among the Poor"Being hartely sory I am able to give her no more, to recompens her most honest, obedient, and womanly behaviour towardes me in my life tyme, which hath byn such as well hath meryted a thowsand tymes more than I am able any waye to give her, &c.". He commissions his said wife, to furnish Trinity college aforesaid, with copes, vestments, and ornaments for divine service, and houshold necessaries. But all these things he completely accomplished himself, in his own life-time, as has been already related. He requires his said wife, in case John Pope, his only brother, should be without a male heir when Elisabeth Pope, daughter of the said John, marries, to bestow ccc marcs, otherwise bequeathed to the said Elisabeth Pope for a marriage-portion, in deeds of charity.As to his estates, not settled on Trinity college, he wills that they should remain, as is expressed and covenanted in a certain pair of quadripartite indentures, dated April the first,

1554In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon. Saepius citat. Between sir Thomas Pope, and Elisabeth his wife, on the one part; And sir Arthur Darcy, Richard Catelyn serjeant at law, deceased, Richard Goodrick, and Antony Waite, on the other. Dat. April i. i Phil. Mar.. By which indentures it appears, that the principal demises of the same were made to Elisabeth his wife, John Pope his brother, John Edmondes his uncle, and Edmund Hutchins his nephewBut in case of non-performance of covenants and conditions therein specified, he orders many of them to be given to "king Henry the eighth's house of poor in West-Smithfield," i. e. saint Bartholomew's hospital; to which he actually bequeathed, as above, 200l. After his death, an inquisition was taken of all his lands and possessions, at Chipping-Norton, com. Oxon. In which the said quadrip. indenture is recited..He further wills, that all manors, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, whatsoever, by him lately given to the president, fellows, and scholars, of Trinity college aforesaid, shall for ever remain under the first assurances by which they were by him settled upon the said college; without interruption or claim of heirs, executors, and assigns, or disturbance of any other person claiming in in their right, name, or title.During the time of founding his college, he chiefly resided at Clerkenwell, LondonFrom his letters to the college. And other evidences. ibid.,

 within the dissolved priory of Black nunsIn a deed of dame Elis. Paulett, dated Feb. i. 35 Eliz. infra-citat. This mansion is called the "capital messuage and scyte of the late dissolved monastery of Clerkenwell." It was granted him by queen Mary, Pat. Phil. Mar. an. 3, 5. Febr. i. par. 4. "Rex et Regin. concess. T. Pope, et al. Pardonationem alienationis pro scitu monasterii de Clerkinwell in com. Middl." In an indenture dat. May xxx, 1538. 30 Hen. viii. he is styled Thomas Pope of London, esquire.: to the repair of the conventual church of which, being left standing at the dissolution, he gave the sum of forty poundsSee pag. 163. supr.. The buildings and site of this religious house, containing fourteen acres, had been granted by king Henry in 1545, to sir William Henley and sir John WilliamsWeever, Fun. Mon. p. 428. Tanner Not. Mon. fol. p. 299.. In the country, he lived much at Tyttenhanger, in the parish of Ridge, in HertfordshireThe Statutes of his college are dated there.; which had been the country-seat of the abbots of saint Alban's, and was conveyed to sir Thomas Pope by Henry the eighth, in the last year of his reign, 1547, but not confirmed to him till by letters patent of Edward the sixth, dated July the twenty-fourth, in the following yearLiber secundus de Les Rates, ann. 3, et 4. Phil. Mar. fol. MSS. Harl. 607. 1. fol. 1. Brit. Mus.—See also pat. Edw. vi. an. 1. Jul. xxiv. par. 4. Where the grant specifies "Scitum Capitalis mansionis de Tyttenhanger, ac Manerium de Tyttenhanger, &c.". However, it appears that he bought

this estate of Queen Mary, June the sixteenth, 1557, for twenty years purchaseIbid. MSS. Harl.: notwithstanding, in a deed dated 1555, he styles himself of TyttenhangerSee Append. Numb. XI., and in the charter of his college, 1554, mentions Tyttenhanger as one of his manors. The house was built by John Moot, one of the abbots of saint Alban's, in 1405Willis Mitr. Abb. i. 22., and much enlarged and adorned by his successors, particularly the learned and munificent John Whethamstede, in the reign of Henry the sixthWeever Fun. Mon. p. 565. edit. 1631.. The chapel was an elegant edifice: and the wainscott, behind the stalls, was beautifully painted with a series of the figures of all the saints who bore the name of John. The windows were enriched with painted glass, which sir Thomas Pope brought hither from the choir of saint Albans abby, when that church was, by his interposition, preserved from total destruction. Sir Thomas Pope also erected over the vestibule of the great hall a noble gallery for wind-musicFrom the Information of Sir Harry Pope-Blount, ut supr.. This house was so large, that in the year

1528, King Henry the eighth and his queen, with their retinue, removed hither from London, during the continuance of the Sweating sicknessHollinsh. Chron, vol. iii. p. 906. 10. col. 2.. But this antient and stately mansion was intirely pulled down, and that which is now standing built in its place, about 1654, by sir Henry Blount, the famous travellerEngl. Baronet. iv. 669. edit. 1741.. Of this county, and of Essex, sir Thomas Pope was twice sheriff, in the years 1552, 1557Chauncy's Hertfordshire, p. 23. Fuller, WORTHIES, p. 31. says, that as to their Sheriff, Hertfordshire and Essex were united till the ninth of Elisabeth, 1567..I must not here forget, that the learned and candid John de Feckenham, the last abbot of Westminster, and a great friend to the princess Elisabeth, about the reign of Edward the sixth, often visited sir Thomas Pope, at Tyttenhanger-house; who never suffered him to depart without a present. Once in particular he gave Feckenham, at parting, a purse filled with twelve angels, his picture in enamel, a silver crucifix studded with pretious stones, and a large missal richly ornamented with thirty-six historical picturesFrom the information of sir Harry Pope-Blount, ut supr.. On the mention of Feckenham, I observe

here, perhaps out of place, that Sir Thomas Pope is said to have joined with abbot Feckenham in an application to queen Mary, to spare the life of sir John Cheek; in consideration of Cheek's eminent learning and integrity, and on condition that he would renounce the heresies of the reformationMSS. F. Wise.. It is certain that this admirable scholar, the restorer of the Greek tongue, would otherwise have been executed in the flames. Yet he did not long survive the remorse of a recantation. His own conscience had all the severities of a martyrdom.To resume the course of our narrative. He seems also, for some time, and so early at least as 1546, to have been settled at Bermondsey in SouthwarkEx indentura dat. May xiii. 38. Hen. viii. MSS. F. Wise.—He also styles himself of Bermondsey, in a deed without date: which however appears to have been made after 7 Edw. vi. In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. The earliest notice of his connection with this place appears from the Patents. Pat. Hen. viii. an. 33. Jan. xvi. par. 5. Edward Powell is licensed to alienate a messuage in Bermondsey to Thomas Pope, knight. This year the monastery there was dissolved.; at which place, and in the neighbourhood, he had acquired a very considerable propertyPat supra citat.. Here,

as I conjecture, he built a house on the ruins of the dissolved abbey of Cluniac monks which he probably purchased of his friend sir Robert, or sir Richard, Southwell, to one of whom that monastery was granted at the dissolutionTanner, Not. Mon. fol. p. 535.. This house, which Stowe calls "a goodly house builded of stone and timber," afterwards came into the possession of the earls of SuffexStowe ubi supr. p. 344. Aubrey's Surrey. V. 39..What was sir Thomas Pope's last illness, or the particular circumstances of his death, I have not found. It is not improbable, but that he was carried off by a pestilential fever, which began to rage with uncommon violence in the autumn of the year 1558, and before the end of the succeeding winter, seized three parts in four of the people of EnglandCooper's, or Lanquette's Chronicle, 4to. 1560. p. 377.; destroying in the general devastation, thirteen bishops, and several other persons, both men and women, of the most eminent rank and qualityGodwyn, p. 340. Engl. edit. 1630. Stowe, by Howes, 634. Strype, Ann. Ref. i. 30, 31.. His last letter to his college, which having established by his munificence, he lived near five years to protect

and assist with his patronage, is dated August the eighth, 1558Registr. prim Coll. praedict. fol. 23. b.. While he meditated further benefactions for the encrease of its endowmentSee Append. No. XXV. Under JOHN PERTE., he died the twenty-ninth day of January following, 1559, on Sexagesima Sunday, at his house in Clerkenwell, in the fiftieth year of his ageFrom an inscription on his Picture, in Trin. coll.—And Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 301. col. 2..He was magnificently buried, with the following solemnitiesMSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. In the British Museum. See Append. Numb. XXVIII.. His body was first carried to the church of Clerkenwell in London, where it was laid under a herse, or shrine, illuminated with wax tapers, for the space of one week. On the seventh day of February, began his funeral procession to the church of saint Stephen's Wallbrook: to which he was conveyed with a standard, a Coat, a penon or banner of arms, a target, helmet, sword, and four dozen of arms, with twelve for the branches of wax tapers, and six for the body, or shrine. He was attended by two heralds at arms, Clarencieux and York. The first bore the coat, and the latter the helmet and crest. Twenty poor men

and twenty poor women, carried torches. The men were cloathed in mantle frieze gowns, and the women inA sort of white veil, often mentioned as part of the mourning-dress of women, at antient funerals. See Strype, ECCL. MEM. iii. 385. rails, which he gave them. Sir Richard Southwell, and sir Thomas Stradling, knights, and diverse gentlemen and others, all in black, where mourners, to the number of sixty or more. All his house at Clerkenwell, and the church, were hung with black, with escotcheons of his arms. After the heralds had offered the sword, target, coat, and helmet at the high altar, and other ceremonies were performed, the company returned back to his house to a banquet, where they were refreshed with spiced bread and wine. The next day followed his morrow mass, in the said church; at which were three Songs, two being pricked songs, and the third the mass of requiem, all sung by the Clerkes of London. He was then buried; after which they went back to his house to dinner, "being, as my manuscript says, a very great dinner, and plenty of all thinges." Then followed a great dole of almes distributed among the Poor.Stowe insinuates, that he was interred in

the north ile of the choir of Wallbrook church. Here was a vault, in which before had been buried his wife Margaret, his daughter Alice, and Anne Pope his sister in law. Stowe adds the following inscription, which was evidently placed there before his death, and I suppose immediately upon the decease of dame Margaret. It was destroyed with the old church. 
Hic jacet Thomas Pope Primus Thesaurarius Augmentationum, et domina Margareta uxor ejus, quae quidem Margareta obiit xvi Jan. MDXXXVIIIFol. edit of Stowe's Survey. 1633. p. 245..But in 1567, eight years after his death, his body and the body of dame Margaret aforesaid, were removed from saint Stephen's Wallbrook to the chapel of Trinity college in Oxford; where they were again interred on the north side of the altar, under a stately tomb of good gothic workmanship, on which are the recumbent figures of sir Thomas Pope in complete armour, and of his second wife Elisabeth, large as the life, in alabaster, with this inscription.Hic jacent corpora Thome Pope militis fundatoris hujus collegii Trinitatis et domine Elizabethe et Margarite uxoris ejus. Qui quidem Thomas obiit xxix. die Ianuarii, M.D. LVIII.Quod tacitum velis nemini dixerisIt originally stood within a grate of iron. Arms, &c. by Lee, ut inf. f. 74. The greatest part of its elegant workmanship is now concealed, and the effect of the whole destroyed, by an alcove, corresponding to another on the opposite side: both which, considered in a general view, are most injudiciously introduced, and are perhaps the only blemishes of the present beautiful chapel..That the body of the founder was actually removed hither, appears unquestionably from the Will of Elizabeth his second wife, who desires expressly to be buried in a vault or tomb in Trinity college chapel in Oxford, "wherein lieth the corps of my late good husband sir Thomas PopeInfra citat.." This is also further confirmed from the testimony of Anthony Wood: who in the Appendix subjoined to his History of the University of Oxford, containing omissions and mistakes of the translator in the Text of that elaborate work, observes; that notwithstanding the inscription in saint Stephen's Wallbrook, his Translator, according to the original English copy, ought to have expressly inserted, in the place

where sir Thomas Pope's burial is mentioned, "Sed sepultus fuit in capella coll. S.S. TrinitatisIn Appendic. Hist. Antiq. Oxon. p. 447. Although this point needs no further authentication, I will add part of a letter written from Strype to Dr. Charlett, master of University college, Oxford. "The funeral of sir Thomas Pope, as it is sett down in the Cotton volume, [see Append.] I mentioned to you in my last, you shall have at the foot of this letter. His body, I find, was soon removed from Clerkenwell [Walbroke] to the college which he founded, and honoured deservedly with a monument there." Dated Low-Layton, April xx, 1709. This letter, as I am informed by the very learned and communicative Dr. Ducarrell, was given by Dr. Charlet to Dr. Dobson, president of Trinity college. The same, being the original, is now in the Bursary of Trinity college. A copy of it is among Cod. MSS. Ballard. Bibl. Bodl. vol. xv. 31.". In the mean time, it is extraordinary that no mention should be recorded of this Removal of the founder's body in any register of the college. That this tomb in the college chapel was standing in the year 1567, at least, that the founder was then removed thither, may be fairly concluded from the two following entries in the computus of the Bursars of that year, and they are the only notices that any where occur concerning it, viz.
"Sol. Mar. 10. tribus Operariis laborantibus per quatuor dies in sacello circa sepulcrum fundatoris, x s. xiij d."Sol. pro quinque modiis calcis circa sepulcrum fundatoris, ij s. xj d.Comp. Burss. 1566.—7..
This monument was probably given by Elizabeth his second wife in her life-time. It was certainly erected after his death, viz. after 1559, as the inscription, which is wrought in large gothic characters out of the substance of the stone, minutely specifies the date of his decease. Elizabeth survived her husband more than thirty years; and, if at all, she must have erected it before 1567, when it appears to have existed. But of this I shall have occasion to bring further evidences.SECT. VI.I Now proceed to throw some collateral light on sir Thomas Pope's history, by giving a detached and distinct account of his brothers, sisters, wives, and friends: most of which have already been occasionally mentioned in the course of this narrative.His brother John Pope, who was one of his heirs, and to whom he granted large estates, appears to have been settled at Wroxton in Oxfordshire, in the reign of Edward the sixthEx Indentur. dat. Aug. 1. 5 Edw. vi. Wroxton was a priory of Augustine Canons. See Append. Numb. XVII.. I find John purchasing of Henry the eighth, in the year 1544, estates belonging to the dissolved canons of Kenilworth in Warwicshire, for 1501l. 13s. 8dDugd. Warw. p. 474.. In the same year he recieved a grant of the site of the house of Franciscan friers at LincolnTanner's Not. Mon. fol. p. 281.: as also, jointly with others, the site of the black friars at Beverly in YorkshireIbid. p. 689.. In

1545, he received some lands belonging to the priory of Bileigh in EssexNewc, Rep. ii. 610.. I could give many more instances from the patents, and privy seals. I find him often entertained at Trinity college, Oxford: and once with his second wife Elizabeth BrockettComp. Burss. 1561.—2. "Sol. pro vino, pyris, aliisque bellariis, insumptis in Magistrum Pope visitantem collegium. ijs. vjd.Comp. 1562.—3. "Sol. ex cerasis, fragis, vino, potu, et saccaro, datis Magistro Pope et uxori ejus visentibus collegium. iijs. xd.Comp. 1562.—3. "Sol. 7 Mart. pro vino, pomis, etc. datis Magistro Pope visenti collegium. xviijd.Comp. 1563.—4. "Sol. 23 Feb. ex belariis insumptis in Magistrum Pope visentem collegium. xviijd.—"Sol. Magistro Pope invisenti collegium. xixd.Comp. 1564.—5. "Sol. in bellariis Magistro Pope, et quibusdam advenis, visentibus collegium. xxijd.Comp. 1568.—9. "Allocat. in epulis Magistri Pope et Magistri Billinge in temp. fessionum. iijs. viijd.Comp. 1572.—3. "Allocat. pro epulis pro Magistro Johanne Pope fratre fundatoris quum hic nos inviseret. vjs. vij d. ob.Comp. 1573.—4. "Allocat. in epulis pro Magistro Pope fratre fundatoris invisente collegium. vjs. viijd.Comp. 1581.—2. "Allocat. in epulis pro Magistro Pope. xs. vjd.". He was three times married. But as a further account of him, his marriages, issue, and their descendants, would take up too much of our time here, and on other accounts requires a

more minute and separate consideration, these particulars shall form an article for the AppendixNumb. XXVI..Sir Thomas Pope's sisters were Alice, Elizabeth, and Julian, as I before observed. Alice was married to Edward Love, gentleman, of Aynhoc, in Northamptonshire; Ex Evident. in Coll. antedict. whose name often occurs in the affairs of Trinity college aforesaid about the time of its foundation, and who appears to have acted as the founder's receiver in Oxfordshire and other countiesRegistr. prim. dicti Coll. fol. 7. b. Et alibi. See Append. Numb. XXI. in the Notes. Among Rawlinson's antient original charts, there is an indenture, by which John, Prior of Nottley Abbey in Bucks, and his convent, lease their appropriate parsonage of Stokelyne to this Edward Love, for sixty one years. Dat. in Dom. Capitul. Mar. 6. A.D. 1524. MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bod. 1322. CH. ult. in pergamen. The lessee is herein discharged from an annual pension, which the convent paid from the said church to saint Frideswyd's priory at Oxford.. She died 1534, and they are both buried in the church of Stoke-Lyne near Bicester in Oxfordshire, with an inscription on a brass-plateOver this inscription are the images of a man in armour, and of a woman, both kneeling before desks: behind him five boys, and behind her three girls. Over their heads, Delicta juventutis nostrae et ignorantias ne memineris domine. Arms, viz.
Quart.A lyon ramp. with a cross patee on his shoulder. LOVE.Parti p. fess indent. in chief 3 martlets.. LOVE. ut supra.Impal.Erm. a fess chequee, a crescent for a difference. ARDEN.One of their daughters, Elizabeth, was married to Simon Parrot, or Perrot, fellow of Magd. coll. Oxon. Who are both buried, with an inscription on a brass-plate, in saint Peter's. Oxon. For this Simon Parrot, see Wood, Hist. et Antiq. ii. 59. and ib. 421. And Smith's Annals Univ. coll. p. 247. See also Append. Numb. XXI. The name of one Parrot, undoubtedly this Simon Parrot, often occurs in papers and accounts relating to the affairs of Trinity college, at its foundation, viz. Append. Numb. XVII. "Three antiphoners of parchmente bought by Mr. Parrot for the queere." And Comp. Burss. 1556.—7. "Sol. pro Campanae secundò reportatione a Magistro Parrot." That a person, at least of this name, was one of the founder's agents in this business, with Edward Love, I find in other articles: and from the following passage of one of the founder's letters to the president, 27 Nov. 1550. "In your next letters send me a bill declaring, particularly, such bokes, and other thinges, as ye have receyved ether from me or els of Mr. Perrot." See supr. p. 117.. Elizabeth his

second sister was married to Richard Hutchins, of Chipping-Norton in the same county, and afterwards to John Orpewood of the same placeBy the first she had one son Edward, or Edmund: and four daughters, Anne, Bridget, Jane, and Mary. By the second, two daughters, Frances and Winifred. Ex testam. T. P. And Lee's MSS. Visit. Oxf. f. 32.. The third sister Julian was, as I conjecture, a nun at Godstowe; and upon the dissolution of that convent, received a grant of an annual pension of vjl. xiijs. ivdWillis, Mitr. Abb. ii. 179. And Append. ibid. 23..

which she continued to possess, 1553. This is a larger pension than was usual: which probably she got by the interest of her brother sir Thomas Pope. And this is more probable, as among other notices, it appears from an indorsement on a fragment of a rental of that nunnery in the hand-writing of sir Thomas Pope, that on their dispersion, he gave a gratuitous donation of forty marcs to twelve of its nuns, who were friendless and born in OxfordshireI know not exactly whether it is of Godstowe or Bicester Priory, both in Oxfordshire. Of the latter, in the Bursary of Trinity college, are two beautiful Audit rolls on vellom, one of the year 1393, the other of 1443.. She, if the same, was however married, before the year 1556, to Henry Bryan of Cogges in OxfordshireTestam. Dom. T. Pope., who seems to have been but in moderate circumstancesComp. Burss. 1562.—3. "Sol. in vino insumpt. in Magistrum Breanum de Cogges. 24 Jun. xiijd.Comp. 1569.—70. "Sol. pro prandio Magistri Bryan fratris domini fundatoris. xijd..As to the wives of sir Thomas Pope, he was three times married. His first wife was Elisabeth Gunston, from whom he was divorced by Richard Gwent, doctor of decrees, archdeacon of London, and principal official in the court of Canterbury, July the eleventh 1536, by the authority of the king and parliamentCollectan. MSS. F. Wise..

 His second wife was Margaret Dodmer, widow, to whom he was married at London, July the seventeenth, 1536From sir T. Pope's BREVIARYThis Breviary Aubrey had intended to place in its proper repository, Trinity college Library; but having conceived some prejudice against Dr. Bathurst the president, he changed his design and gave it to the Ashmolean. From his LETTER to A. Wood, dat. 1674. Cod. BAIL. Bibl. Bodl. vol. xiv., written and illuminated, given by John Aubrey the Antiquarian to the Ashmolean Museum. No. 55. In it, among others, are the following entries."Memorand. quod Margaretta uxor Thomae Pope equitis obiit die Lunae viz. xvio. die Januarii, A. Dni M.D. xxxviii. circa horam decimam ejusdem diei postmeridianam, et sepulta erat die dominical. sequent. in ecclia Sti Stephani in Walbroke."Alicia filia Thomae Pope nata erat die dominicae, viz. xvi. die Aprilis, Ao. xxviiio. dom. H. viii. circa horam nonam ejusdem die post meridiem, Ao. Dom. M.D. xxxvii."Matrimonium inter Thomam Pope primarium Thesaurarium augment. Revent. coronae Dom. R. et Dnam Margaretam Dodmer, Viduam, solemnizatum erat in London. xvii. die Julii Ao. xxviii. Dom. Hen. viii. Anno Dni. M.D. xxxvi. to.—Quod tacitum velis nemini dixeris.—THOMAS POPE, Miles., by licence from archbishop Cranmer, authorised by parliament for this purpose"Authoritate Parliamenti ad infra scripta fulcitus." Collectan. MSS. F. Wise. Ex Licent.. Margaret Dodmer's maiden name was Townsend, and she was a native of Stamford in LincolnshireSo indorsed on the said licence.. She was the relict of Ralph Dodmer,

mercer and sheriff of London, 1524; afterwards knightedAt Yorke-place, 21 Hen. viii. MSS. Bibl. Cott. Claud. c. 3. fol. iii. The same sir Ralph Dodmer was also major of the staple at Westminster, 23. Feb. 23 Hen. viii. Madox, Formul. Angl. pag. 20., and mayor of London, 1529Stowe's Survey of London. Edit. fol. 1633. p. 580, 579. He was also sheriff of London 1529. See edit. 1599. 4to. p. 444, 445. Ralph's father was Henry, of Pickering-Leigh, Yorkshire. Stowe, ibid.. She was married to the said Ralph, by licence from cardinal Wolsey, dated November the twentieth, 1527Collectan. MSS. F. Wise.. By this sir Ralph Dodmer, she had two sons Ralph and John, both living 1554Ex indentura quadripartit. praedict.—John is mentioned in Testam. T. P. 1556., and two daughters, Ann and MaryThese two daughters, with the two sons aforesaid, are all mentioned in a grant of lands to sir T. Pope, pat. 28. Hen. viii Test. Mar. i. par. 5.—"Prolibus Rad. Dodmer militis, civis London." Sir T. Pope, in his will, requests his executors, &c. "to help to sett forward" the children of his late wife Marg. Dodmer, "which be fryndless."—Stowe informs us that, "near Thames streete is Grantham lane, so called of John Grantham sometime mayor and owner thereof, whose house was very large and strong, builded of stone, as appeareth by gates arched yet remaining. Ralph Dodmer first a brewer, than a mercer, mayor 1529, dwelled ther, and kept his mayoralty in that house, &c." SURVEY, ut supr, edit. 1599. p. 183.. By sir Thomas Pope, her second husband, she had only one

daughter Alice, born April the sixteenth, 1537From sir T. Pope's BREVIARY, ut supr., who died very young. Lee, in a book of arms, chiefly of Oxfordshire, drawn by himself in 1574, gives us the arms of Dodmer impaling Pope, from an escocheon of painted glass in a window at Trinity college, since destroyed with many others: viz. Four lozenges meeting in point, gules, between four roses of the same: Upon a chief, gules, a wheat sheaf between two annulets, OrMus. Ashmol. Oxon. MSS. Codd. A. Wood. D. 14. pag. 74. His arms are not tricked (as those of other knights are) in the manuscript cited above, viz. Claud. c. 3. fol. 111. bibl. Cotton.. But these arms do not agree with an engraving of the arms of sir Ralph Dodmer given by StoweUbi supr., With this lady Margaret, sir Thomas Pope seems to have lived in the greatest harmony and happiness; for in his Will he mentions with much affection, "her womanlie behaviour, trewth, and honestie, used towards me," and makes this the sole cause of his kind remembrances and gifts to her son; beseeching his executors, and honorable friends, to treat all her children as his own. She died the sixteenth day of January, 1538From sir T. Pope's BREVIARY, supr. And her Tomb..
His third wife, who deserves more particular notice, was Elizabeth the daughter of Walter Blount, esquire, of Blount's Hall in Staffordshire, and Mary his wife, descended from the illustrious family of Dudley Sutton, of which were the famous, John Dudley duke of Northumberland, and Robert earl of Leicester. The said Elizabeth when married to sir Thomas Pope, was relict of Anthony Basford, or Beresford, esquire, of Bentley in Derbyshire, by whom she had an only son JohnThe true name is Beresford, as appears from a pedigree of the family in MSS. Visitation of Derbyshire, taken by Flower and Glover, 1562, fol. 25. b. Mus. Ashmol. Codd. Ashmol. 728. As also from a deed recited above, where John Beresford, probably her son, mentioned in the text, is a subscribing witness. I likewise find one Beresford, perhaps the same, buried as it seems in the college, 1567. Comp. Burss. ut supr. An. 1566.—7. "Alloc. in prancium famulis dominae fundatricis cum persolverentur justa Magistro Beresford, xs.This respectable family came originally from Staffordshire, where is a village so called: and flourishes still in Derbyshire. See Visitation of Staffordshire, in 1963, and 1664. By Dugdale Norr. Herald. MSS. Coll. Armor. C. 36. fol. 114. And Lodge, Peer. Ireland, ii. 210. ed. 1754. As to her son John, the founder sent him to Trinity college, Oxford, to be educated under Arthur Yeldard one of the fellows: with a letter printed in Append. Numb. XXV. In another letter, to the president, the founder desires the lecturers, "to tech him and to rede him Erasmus pistells and Tully's pistells, which he shall lerne to translate well." He is a witness to the codicil of sir T. Pope's will.. It is said by one who

knew her wellDr. Ralph Kettell, president of the college. See Append. Numb. XXX., that sir Thomas Pope was induced to marry this lady principally on account of her charitable disposition, and and other excellent qualifications; and that she heartily concurred with her husband's pious intention of founding a college. They were married by licence from archbishop Cranmer, the first of January, 1540MSS. Collectan. F. Wise.. They had no issue. After the death of sir Thomas Pope in January 1559, she was married, for the third time, before or in December followingAs appears from Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1560.—1. viz. "Sol. Decemb. i. pro pari Chirothecarum dat. dom. Powlett et dominae fundatrici. xvjs. This present, I presume, was a compliment on their marriage., to sir Hugh Powlett of Hinton saint George in Somersetshire: concerning whose life and character, it may not perhaps be thought too great a digression to mention some few particulars.Sir Hugh Powlett was the son of sir Amias Powlett knight, of whom it is remembered, that having incurred the displeasure of cardinal Wolsey, to produce a reconciliation, he

re-edified the gate of the middle temple, where he was treasurer, in a most superb manner, introducing among other decorations, the cardinal's arms, cognisance, and badgesDugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 188. In the British museum, there is a translation of a French romance into English, entitled L' Histoire de la Duckesse de Savoye, by sir Hugh Powlett. Par Hagues le fils des Mons. Aime Powlett, &c. MSS. Harl. 1215. 4to. It is probably one of his juvenile exercises in the French language.. Sir Hugh, during the reign of Henry the Eighth, was much in favor with that king. He was invited, in 1537, with the principal nobility, to attend the magnificent baptism of prince EdwardStrype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 5.. He was knighted for his gallant services against the French in the wars of that reign: particularly for his behaviour at taking the Brey, at the siege of Boloigne, in the presence of the kingCollins, Peer. iii. 223. ed. 2. He was knighted Octob. 18. 1536. MSS. Cotton. Claud. iii. c. fol. 127. b. He was treasurer of the king's army at the siege of BoloigneFalle's Jersey, edit. 1694. p. 91.. In consideration of these merits, he was rewarded by Henry the eighth with several grants of manors and landsCollins, ut supr.. By that king he was likewise appointed surveyor of the rents of the dissolved

monastery of GlastonburyMay ii. Priv. Sig. Ann. 37. Hen. viii.. In the third year of Edward the sixth, he was knightmarshal of the army commanded by lord Russel lord privy seal, and sent against the rebels of Cornwall and Devonshire, whom he totally defeatedHollingshed, Chron. iii. 1026.. For these services he was, the year following, appointed, for life, governor of the isle of Jersey and Mount-Orgueil-castlePat. 4. Edw. vi. Test. Mar. xx par. 9. In Q. Mary's council-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr. are many letters to him from the privy-council, relating to this office.. In 1551, the fifth year of the lastmentioned king, he was installed knight of the garter, at a chapter held in the royal palace of GreenwichAnstis, Order of the Garter, vol. ii. 446.. In 1559, the the first year of queen Elizabeth, the privy council constituted him vice-president of the marches of Wales, in the absence of lord Williams, presidenttrype's Ref. i. 23.. In 1563, he was made governor of Havre de GraceFalle, ibid., then in the hands of the English. The next year, he was one of the principal commanders who so bravely defended Newhaven against the French. On this occasion, when Montmorency, constable of France, sent a trumpet

to the earl of Warwick summoning him to surrender, sir Hugh Powlett was deputed by the earl to assure the Constable, that the English were prepared and resolved to suffer the last extremity before they would yield the town, without the queen's express orders. And when the English army was at length so miserably reduced by a pestilence, that her majesty in compassion to those gallant soldiers who still survived, gave directions to lord Warwick to deliver up the place; sir Hugh Powlett was the chief of the commissioners who conducted the conferences with the constable of France for the capitulationStowe, per Howes, 665. Camden. Eliz.. He was in a word, beside the character of singular prudence and integrity, one of the most intrepid and experienced officers of his timeSee Burghley's State-papers, by Haynes, p. 407. Stowe ut supr. 653.. He was father, by a former wife, of sir Amias PowlettFalle, ibid., a privy counsellor and an eminent statesman, in the reign of queen ElizabethIn the year 1586, Mary queen of Scots was committed to his custody. This trust he so honourably discharged, that when secretary Walsingham persuaded him to suffer one of his servants to be bribed by the agents of the queen of Scots, for the sake of better intelligence, he rejected the proposal with indignation. Camd. ELIZ. ed. Hearne, ii. 533. 488. Fuller's WORTHIES. Somersetshire. I find him, before he was knighted, visiting the fellows and scholars of Trinity college, Oxford, at Garsington, in time of the plague. Comp. Burss. 1571.—2. 
"Alloc. pro epulis quo tempore Magistre Amisius Powlett veniebat ad collegium Garsingtoniae. ivs. iv d. q." Lord Bacon, when very young, attended him on an embassy into France, Dugd. Bar. ii. 438. See Strype's Ann. Ref. iii. 360. Where is a letter written to him by the queen, with her own hand, superscribed, to my faithfull Amyas, and in which she calls him, my Amyas. Compare Hearne, ROB. GLOUC. p. 673. seq. And MSS. Harl. 6994. 29. 30. And Ballard's LEARNED LADIES. In ADD. and CORR.. Sir Hugh died in 1571, being

then representative in parliament for the county of SomersetWillis, Notit. Parl. p. 94., and without issue by this lady.This Lady, whom we must now call Dame Elizabeth Powlett, did not, however, from her new connection discontinue that previous and natural attachment, which, in the character of foundress, she bore to the foundation of her former husband sir Thomas Pope. She possessed indeed no small jurisdiction over the transactions of the society: for the founder had delegated to her the authority of nominating it's scholars, and presenting to it's advowsons, during lifeOnce, by the same authority, she nominated a president. See Append. Numb. XXV. It appears, however, that the college once rejected her nomination to a scholarship, and chose another candidate. Upon this she appealed to Cooper bishop of Winchester, the visitor, who superseded the person elected by the college, and decreed that her nomination should take place. Aug. ii. 1592. Registr. prim. dict coll. fol. 48. b.. And this power,

yet with some interruptionsParticularly, from 1563 to 1578 inclusive, it does not appear by the register, that she used her privilege of nominating to the scholarships. But she afterwards resumed it. She sometimes nominated the fellows., she continued to exercise till her deathRegistr. prim. coll. antedict. passim.. Nor was she wanting in proper marks of affection to a place, to which she was by the strongest ties so nearly related. She engaged her husband, sir Hugh Powlett, to join with her in protecting the interests of the college. She added, in part, to the founder's endowment, after his death, the rectory of Ridge in Hertfordshire, and the advowson to the vicarageEx indentur. dat. April. 1. 22 Eliz. apud coll. praedict. See Append. Numb. XXX. And registr. prim. fol. 46.. She freely fulfilled the founder's unlimited charge, in which she was bound to finish the house at Garsington abovementioned; the cost of it having exceeded the five hundred marcs which he specified by will for that purpose: and accordingly we find her, from time to time, advancing without reserve, the necessary supplies of timber and moneyViz. the sum of 28l. 9s. 3d. in 1566. Ex Registr. in 4to. ut supr. And Comp. 1566.—6. Beside timber in 1561.—2. and 1564. Ex Comp. et Registr. praedict. She also glased the house. Comp. 1570.—1. "Sol. pro expens. Magistri Praesidis et magistri Chambrelen proficisc. Londinum ad dom. fundatricem and parandum vitrum pro domo apud Garsington. xxxs. vd." Glass, at this time, was neither a cheap nor a common commodity. The glasing of a large building was a considerable work.. She appears often to have interested

herself in the affairs of the society, and to have lent her assistance and advice on many occasions: for which she frequently received their testimonies of respect and regardFrom the following articles, among many others.Comp. Burss. 1560.—1. "Sol. pro expens. Magistri Praesidis equitantis ad dom. fundatricem de visitatione futura. xxxixs. vjd."Comp. 1563.—4. "Sol. Maii 24. pro expens. Magistri praesidis et duorum famulorum dominae fundatricis venientium Londino, circa necessaria collegii negotia, et Magistri Praesidis illuc eadem de causa profecti. xxs. xd.—"Sol. eod. die pro expens. eorundem [famulorum] dum Oxoniae manerent. xs vijd."Comp. 1563.—4. "Sol. Jan. 27. ex pari chirothecarum dat. doni. fundatrici. ivs. ivd.Comp. 1566.—7. "Alloc. in prandium famulis dom. fundatricis. xs.Comp. 1568.—9. "Sol. pro duobus paribus chirothecarum missis ad domini Powlett et fundatricem. xs.—"Sol. pro epulis famuli fundatricis. ijs. ob. q.Comp. 1569.—70. "Sol. pro chircthecis missis ad dom. fundatricem. vjs.Comp. 1570.—1. "Sol. pro epulis famuli fundatricis. iijs. ixd.Comp. 1574.—5. "Dat. famulo fundatricis adferenti ferinam. ijs.Comp. 1579.—80. "Sol. pro chirothecis dom. episcopi Wynton, et dominae fundatricis. xviijs. vjd.Comp. 1589.—90. "Sol. Magistro praesidi proficiscenti ad dom. fundatricem. iijl. xvs. vd.Comp. 1590.—1. "Sol. pro chirothecis dom. fundatricis. vjs.—"Sol portanti strenam [a new year's gift] ad dom. fundatricem. vjs.In a letter written to her by the society, dated June xvii. 1573. they tell her, "Wysshyng you hartily that it wold pleasse your ladiship to visytt your college, and us your daily orators, now in your journey downe into Summersettsnyre, which thynge would be a greate comsorte to us all." In Thesauriar. praedict. I have seen a sermon, preached at St. Paul's, dedicated to this Lady, by Bartholomew Chamberleyn, an eminent preacher, and fellow of the college. Lond. 8vo. 1589. [One Mr. Chamberlayne of Oxford occurs among many eminent divines who preached in the Churcst of Stevington, [f. Berks,] from A.D. 1573, to 1578. MSS. Harl. 2396. 123. f. 157.] Once I find her present at the college

in 1565, viz. "Sol. pro Refectione data Fundatrici, liijs. iiijdComp. Burss. 1565.." Sir Edward Hoby, an eminent statesman and scholar, in the reigns of queen Elizabeth and James the first, styles her in a latin epistleMS. To Dr. Ralph Kettell, abovementioned. Dat. 1613. In Bibliothec. Coll. antedict., "praenobilis heroina;" and adds the great obligation she had conferred upon him in admitting into the college, Bernard AdamsSchol. Maii 30. 1583. Soc. Jun. 3. 1588. E Registr. prim.—Consecrat. Episc. Limericens. 1604. Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 730. Hoby's words are, "Arctiori etiam vinculo constrinxit praenohilis heroina Fundatrix vestra, quo tempore Bernardum Adamum, nunc Limbricensem Episcopum, pro amore in me suo, in Albo vestro conscripsit, sustentavit, aluit." I find this notice occurring, concerning bishop Adams, in Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1619.—20. "Exp. quar do collegium recepit rev. in Christo patr. Episcop. Limbricens. iijl. is. vijd." Ware says, that Adams adorned his cathedral with a new organ, and other costly furniture. PRAESUL. HIBERN. p. 189. His picture, a good old portrait on board, is at Trinity college.When queen Elisabeth visited Oxford, 1566, a book was presented to her majesty, by Nele, the Hebrew Professor, entitled Collegiorum Scholarumque Publicarum Acad. Oxon. Topographica Delineatio. With verses under each. Under TRINITY COLLEGE are the following lines, some of which particularly respect this lady, as a patroness of her husband's foundation. 
Urbis at egresso jam maenia, proxima sedesOccurrit, THOMAE sumptibus aucta POPI:Quam sacro-sanctae Triados cognomen habereJussit inauratus Miles, Equestre Decus.Hujus adhuc teneros Foetus pia mater adaugetConjux, tam digno Conjuge digna suo. Vid: H. Dodwelli Parm. equestr. by Hearne, pag. 142. And J. Bereblock's Relation of the queen's visit to Oxford, apud Hist. Ricard. ii. per Hearne, p. 283. See also Miles Windfore's EUROPAEI ORBIS ACADEMIAE, Lond. 1590. A copy of these pictures and verses is in the archives of the Bodleyan Library, probably the same which was presented to the queen. The verses were written by Nele; and the buildings delineated by John Bereblock abovementioned, a fellow of Exeter college., afterwards

bishop of Limerick. Sir Hugh Powlett assisted the college with his patronage, in a troublesome and expensive law-suit against lord Rich, and enabled them to overthrow their

powerful antagonistAbout 1561. From a latin epistle of the college to him, dat. Jun. xiv. 1566. ut infr.. He generously gave them a present of twenty pounds in silver, in 1566, for finishing the stone wall round their GroveFor these things they tell him, "Maximum quod a nobis dari potuit munus, Dominationi tuae detulimus: ut primas tu quidem post FUNDATOREM nostrum, cujus laudes nulla oblivionis aerugine exedi, nullis unquam sordibus obsolescere poterunt, inter omnes qui de nobis benemetendo nominis immortalitatem consequuntur, tuo jure teneres." From the same latin epistle. It is addressed "Ornatissimo viro et patrono nostro dignissimo D. HUGONI PAULETT." In Thesaur. ut supr. In the law-suit, they acknowledge themselves assisted, "tuo consilio et industria.". I find him entertained with them on Trinity Sunday the preceding yearFrom a foul copy of the said latin epistle.. I find him also visiting them 1567, viz. "Allocat. Jun. xxviii. pro dapibus domini Paulett visentis collegium, vjs. viijd. Item pro cerasis et vino eodem tempore, ijs. ivd. [ixs.]Comp. Burss. 1566.—7..But I proceed to some other particulars concerning Dame Elizabeth Powlett. In the year 1560, she placed in rich painted glass in a window of the choir, or chancell, of the church of Broadwell in Oxsordshire, an image of the Holy Trinity, with the figures

of herself and Sir Thomas PopeProbably the reason why she did not place here the figure of her present husband Sir Hugh Powlett, rather than that of Sir Thomas Pope, was because this picture was intended as a memorial of the college to which the church belonged. In the large old mansion house at Filkins, a hamlet of Broadwell, pulled down about fifty years ago, there were on the spouts the initials E. P. for Elisabeth Powlett, and the date 1592., both kneeling in their heraldic surcoats of arms. But this window was removed or destroyed the following year by own her command, being censured as superstitiousMSS. F. Wife.. In the following year, she gave a great clock to the late conventual church of Clerkenwell in LondonMSS. F. Wife.. This was a considerable benefaction, and not unworthy to be mentioned here; as clocks, if of any size, were at that time uncommon and very expensive. In 1564, she placed a new pair of organs, with a picture of the Passion of Saint Sebastian, in the chapel of Tytten-hanger-houseMSS. F. Wife. This article, and the two foregoing, I believe, were communicated to Mr. Wife by the late sir Harry Pope-Blount, who seems to have had them from some family papers or memoirs.. In the year 1592, being desirous of perpetuating her affection to her native town of Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire, by the memorial of some public benefaction, she gave an annuity of

fifteen pounds issuing from her estate in Clerkenwell, and all her lands and possessions at Bentley in Derbyshire, for improving the salaries of the first and second masters of the free-school, and also for the perpetual maintenance of five poor women, aged and unmarried, in that townEx indentura, dat. 1 Feb. 35 Eliz. apud Burton praedict. By this benefaction, the schoolmaster is to receive yearly, iijl. And the usher vjl. The poor women are provided with a lodging each: fewel, with other necessaries; one frieze gown, one apron, one smock, and xxvjs. viijd. in money, yearly. She refers to these charities in her will.. At length this pious and respectable lady having lived to a very great age, died the following year 1593, on the twenty-seventh day of October, at Tyttenhanger in HertfordshireFrom Wood's original English of History and Antiquities of the University of Oxford, MSS. Autograph. olim in Archivis Univ. Oxon. Nunc Bibl. Bodl.—She chiefly lived at Tyttenhanger and Clerkenwell. There are three of her letters to Trinity college; the first of which is dated Tyttenhanger, Sept. 23. 1559. Registr. prim. fol. 24. b. The second, Tyttenhanger, Sept. 5. 1570. Ibid. fol. 23. The third, Clerkenwell, Jun. 12. 1590. fol. 46. Ibid. In the year 1578, she was visited at Tyttenhanger by queen Elizabeth, in a royal progress. Blomefield's NORFOLK. iii. 481. See also Strype. ANN. REP. ii. p. 542. ed. 2. And W. Lilly's LIFE, p. 11. edit. 1774.. When her body was carried from thence, to be buried at Oxford, five pounds in money, and large provisions of meat and drink were distributed

to the Poor, at the gate of Tyttenhanger-houseEx testam.. On the first of November following, the corpse arrived at Oxford, where, not so much on account of her rank, as in regard to that public relation which her former husband sir Thomas Pope bore to the university, it was laid in state, in saint Mary's churchWood, MSS. ut supr.. The next day it was conveyed with proper solemnity to Trinity college, attended by the president, fellows, and scholars of the same, all cloathed in mourning at her own chargeEx testam.; where with great pomp she was interred in the chapel, with sir Thomas Pope and his former wife Margaret. Three pennons, containg impalements of all her three husbands, Beresford, POPE, and Powlett, were hung up over the tombFrom MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. Num. 1724.. Twenty-five of the poorest women which could be found in Oxford, were ordered to be present at the interment, habited in black gowns of frieze. On this occasion, a sumptuous dinner was provided in the hall of the college, for the whole society, and attendants of the funeral. The remains of the entertainment were distributed to the poor at the college-gate, and

five pounds in money. At the same time, a legacy of ten shillings was delivered to each of the scholars. All this was by her own directionsEx testam.. She bequeathed xjl. vs. to several prisons: and to every single prisoner at Oxford one stone of beef. To the poorest and most diseased patients in the hospital of saint Bartholomew"Amongest the poorest, most sicklye and diseased people within that house." in West-Smithfield, xls. to be delivered to each of them respectively, within one week after her decease. Among other bequests to her honorable friends and relations, she leaves, to lord keeper Puckeringe a standing cup with a cover, of silver gilt. To lord treasurer Burleigh a ring of gold garnished with a diamond, pointed upwards and downwards, which was sometime the ring of lord keeper sir Nicholas Bacon, and by him sold to sir Arthur Darcy, who sold the same to sir Thomas Pope for one hundred pounds. To the earl of Ormond her black ambling horse.Thomas earl of Ormond lord high treasurer of Ireland, and the queen's General in the Irish rebellion. See Carte's ORMOND, vol. i. INTRODUCT. p. liii. edit. fol. 1736. To the countess of Warwick, aunt of sir Philip Sydney, two long cushions of red cloth of gold, for the furniture of a bow window; and an ewer

of silver, suitable to the bason which she gave her at the last "New yeres tide," for a new year's giftShe was Anne, daughter of Francis earl of Bedford, third wife of Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick, high in favor with queen Elisabeth, and who died in 1595. Dugdal. WARW. p. 339. See the large inscription on this earl's tomb in the Virgin Mary's chapel at Warwick. To his countess, the same that is mentioned in the text, sir Philip Sydney bequeathed one of his best jewels, in 1589. See MEM. prefixed to Collins's SYDNEY-PAPERS, p. 111. And ibid. p. 42. She is often mentioned in the SYDNEY-PAPERS, and on important occasions. She died in 1603. Collins's MEM. ut supr. p. 42. See Norden's HARTFORDSHIRE, p. 20. Strype, REF. iii. 598. Ames, HIST. PRINT. p. 425.. To lady Stafford, lady of the queen's privy chamber, a candlestick of silver, weighing twenty two ounces, suitable to two others before givenMary daughter of Edward earl of Darby, wife of Edward, Baron lord Stafford. See Dugdal. BARON. i. 171.. To lady Scudamore, a very fair casting bottle of silver gilt, weighing fifteen ouncesThis lady occurs more than once in the SYDNEY-PAPERS.—Rowland Whyte to Sir Robert Sydney, 1597. "Upon sunday in the afternoone, my Lady Skudamore gott the QUEENE to reade your letter, who asked of her how yt came to her handes. She answered, that my lady Sidney desired her to delyver yt to her majestie from her husbande. Do you know the contents of it, sayd the queene? No, madam, sayd she. When her majestie sayd, here is much ado about the CINQUE PORTS. I demanded of my lady Skudamore, what she observed in her majestie while she was a reading of it: who fayd, she read yt all over with two or three pughs." vol. ii. p. 97. Again, Whyte to sir Robert Sydney, 1599. "Yesterday the countess of Leicester sent to the queene a curious fyne gowne, which was presented by Lady Skudamore, &c." ibid. p. 174. Some of the court history of this family is probably couched under the adventures of SYR SCUDAMORE in Spenser's FAERIE QUEENE.. To her sister lady Sydenham,

a nest of silver bowls, two trencher Salts of silver, and her bed, with all its rich furniture, of cloth ofA light red. See Steevens's SHAKESPEARE, vol. i. p. 62, 63. edit. 1779. Dr. Borde, in his DIETARIE OF HELTHE, written in 1541, says, under the chapter of APPAREL, "in omer use to weare a skarlet petycote of stamel or linsie wolsie." ch. viii. stamel colourEx testam. dat. April. xvi. 1593. Probat. Feb. viii. 1594. In Registro Dixey, 83. 15. Cur. Praerog. Cant. The executors are, William Weston, Pope Blount, Edward Blount, and Edward Blount.. These particulars acquaint us with her connections, and shew the manners of the times.She had two brothers; William BlountHe married Frances, one of the three daughters of Edward Love, and Alice his wife, sister of sir Tho. Pope abovementioned. He was settled at Osberston, co. Leicester, and dying 1592. Nov. xxvi. was buried in the church of Ridge, the parish church of Tyttenhanger, co. Hertford. See Burton's. Leicestershire. p. 210. 211. an executor, with Nicholas Bacon, of sir Thomas Pope's will: and Walter Blount, nominated a scholar of Trinty college, Oxford, by the founder, and admitted January the ninth, 1557Registr. prim. fol. 4. See Append Numb. XXV. He left the college soon afterwards, as appears from the following extract of one of the founder's letters. "I am content to dispens with my wiffs brother for his scholers rome, which I do the rather, for that I believe he ment to lese his rome [place] by his absens. I wold he shold be broken of some part of his witt; assuringe you from henceforth I will for no mans pleassure living breke my statutes, neither in that, nor in eny other poynt. For when I shall goo about to breke my estatutes in my owne life, howe maye I hope to have theym kept after I am gone?" To the President, without Date. But my chief reason for citing this passage, is to shew his impartiality and disinterestedness, and at the same time his resolution and prudence, in keeping up the statutes of his college which he had once given, even against the benefit and convenience of his own relations, and in a case where he might have acted just as he pleased.. Her sisters were Mary,

Anne and EllenEx Test. T. P. — Mary was married to — Sidenham knight, perhaps sir George, of Combe Sydenham, co. Som. as appears by Anne Blount's epitaph in the church of Clerkenwell. Stowe's SURVEY, edit. 1618. p. 819. Also from lady Powlett's Will; and these notices in Comp. Burss. coll. Trin.Comp. 1574.—5. "Sol. pro duobus paribus chirothecarum pro domina fundatrice et domino Sydenham. xjs.Comp. 1573.—4. "Alloc. pro cena Magistri Sydenham, fratris fundatricis, nos invisentis. vs.Ellen, as I guess, was married to — Goodwyn. Anne, buriad as above, died unmarried. William Blount's heir ThomasHe was knighted by James I. at Theobalds, 1603. And offered by him the dignity of a baronet. Collins's Bar. iv. 667.—He occurs matriculated of Trin. coll. Oxon. by the name of Thomas Pope-Blount, Aet. 18. Nov. xi. 1574. Wood MSS. Mus. Ashm. E. 5., who was settled at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire about 1593, prefixed Pope to the name of Blount, in remembrance of

sir Thomas Pope; as many of his lineal descendants have done.Of this family of Blount there were afterwards three eminent writers: sir Henry Blount knight, sir Thomas Pope-Blount knight, and baronet, and Charles Blount, esquire. Concerning whom a few words may not be perhaps impertinent or unacceptable. Sir Henry Blount was admitted a gentleman-commoner of Trinity college Oxford, in 1615Ex Registro in 4to. apud Coll. Trin. supr. citat. I find his elder brother Thomas, admitted with him a CONVICTOR of the superior rank. ibid. Thomas quitted the college in 1615. Henry in 1619. ibid., under the tuition of the learned Robert Skynner one of the fellows, afterwards successively bishop of Bristol, Oxford, and Worcester, in the fourteenth year of his age: where, at that early period of life, he attracted the peculiar attention and esteem of the society, more from his own personal and intrinsic accomplishments, his amiable disposition, lively conversation, engaging address, genius, and taste for polite literature, than from his family connections, and his near relation to the founderWood, ATH. OXON. ii. 712.. In 1636, He published his VOYAGE INTO THE LEVANT, which became exceedingly popular, and was

frequently reprinted. But to say the truth, this little work is the voyage of a sceptic: it has more of the philosopher than the traveller, and would probably never have been written, but for the purpose of insinuating his religious sentiments. Yet his reflections are so striking and original, and so artfully interwoven with the thread of his adventures, that they enliven, instead of embarrassing, the narrative. He has the plausible art of colouring his paradoxes with the resemblance of truth. So little penetration had the orthodox court of Charles the first, that merely on the merit of this book, he was appointed one of the band of PensionersFor some of his other pieces, see Wood's ATH. OXON. ii. 712. And Langbaine's DRAM. POETS, p. 327.. Sir Thomas Pope-Blount his eldest son was born in 1649, and was educated under his father's inspection. His CENSURA CELEBRIORUM AUTHORUM, which is a compilation of great erudition and labour, is well known to the critic and the literary historian. Niceron unfortunately compares the CENSURA with Baillet's JUGEMENT DES SAVANSMEMOIRES pour servir, &c. tom. xxiii. p. 399.. But Baillet has the vanity and injustice to report the opinions of other writers in his own words: our author has the modesty and fidelity to transcribe and

to cite his authorities. His ESSAYS on various subjects are learned and judicious, and they have the ease and freedom, without the singularity, of Montaigne. Another of his works, which has been superseded by those who have used its materials, is REMARKS ON POETRY. Of this piece it will be sufficient to say, that it was honoured with the approbation of lord Mulgrave, the most elegant critic of the author's age. Charles Blount, or Pope-Blount, esquire, second son of sir Henry abovementioned, inherited his father's philosophy. From an abhorence of superstition, he appears to have adopted the most distant extremes of the theistic system. His ANIMA MUNDI, ORACLES OF REASON, LIFE OF APPOLLONIUS TYANAEUS, and DIANA OF THE EPHESIANS, written with great learning, sagacity, wit, and force of reasoning, are the consolation of infidels, and are melancholy monuments of admirable abilities abused in the defence of a futile but dangerous causeSee the MISCELLANEOUS WORKS of Charles Blount, published by Charles Gildon in 1693. And Wood, ubi supr.. In conformity to these principles, he died by his own hand in 1693. Bayle has inaccurately represented the affecting story of his deathArtic. APOLLONIUS TYANAEUS. The true story is this. Mr. Blount, on the death of his wife, fell in love with her sister, a lady of great beauty and accomplishments: she was not insensible to his attachment, but was scrupulous about the legality of marrying her sister's late husband. On his application to the most learned civilians, and the archbishop of Canterbury, he was informed, that such a match could not take place. On this, the lady positively refused her consent, and Mr. Blount in a fit of despair shot himself through the head. The wound not immediately proving mortal, he lived five days: during which time, he received no fustenance or medicines but from the hands of the lady, who attended him with the most sympathetic tenderness till his last moments. This account I received from the late sir Harry Pope-Blount, baronet, the last of the family, and a diligent and faithful antiquary..
I close my account of Dame Elizabeth Powlett, and her nearer relations, with a few words concerning the antiquity and dignity of her family. Its ancestor was Le Blound lord of Guisnes in Normany, whose sons Robert and William le Blound, both entered England with William the conqueror. William was one of the captains in that expedition, and quartered, with other Norman knights, on the monks of Ely. Robert was created by the conqueror, baron of Ixworth in Suffolk; in which county he received a grant of thirteen lordships. Gilbert, his son, founded an Augustine priory at Ixworth, in the reign of William Rufus, which he endowed with fourteen knights fees. One of Gilbert's descendants was killed at the battle of Lewes,

in the reign of Henry the third, where he was standard-bearer to Mountford earl of Leicester. In the progress of it's descent, this family numbers many persons of singular eminence and high stationSee Peacham's COMPLEAT GENTLEMAN, edit. 1661. pag. 230. And Eng. Baronet. iv. 665. 675. 576. And ii. 367.; and is, besides, nobly connected by marriages. On the sides of the tomb in Trinity college chapel abovementioned, are two coats: Pope impaling Quarterings of Blount, viz. Barry, Nebule of six, Or, and sable; And of Roger de Sutton, ancestor of Elizabeth's mother, viz. A lyon rampant. This is one coat. The other consists of quarterings of Blount, Of the said Roger de Sutton; and, Of Nicholas de Wichard lord of the manor of Osberston aforesaid in the reign of Henry the third, marrying into the said Roger, viz. Azure, a cheveron Argent, between three martletsSee Burton's Leicestershire, p. 211. Or. These arms are an additional and evident proof, that Dame Elizabeth Powlett erected this monument; in decorating which, she was so studious to introduce the ensigns and honors of her own familyThere is an old portrait of lady Powlett, in the Bursary at Trinity college, painted, as I judge from the drapery and the age of the countenance, about the middle of Q. Elisabeth's reign; by which she appears to have been handsome. This picture was in the college at least before 1613. It is mentioned in Comp. Burss. coll. 1612.—13. I have been told that this picture was painted by sir Antonio More, portrait and history painter to Philip and Mary. Several of his pictures were in the collection of king Charles the first, and at sir Philip Sydenham's at Brympton in Somersetshire, a family (as we have seen) nearly related to Lady Powlett. More had one hundred ducats for his common portraits. He died in 1575. I rather think this picture is a copy of an original by More..SECT. VII.IT may be necessary to speak of sir Thomas Pope's friends, and of those with whom he seems to have maintained any particular intimacy, connection, or intercourse: notwithstanding most of their names have before occurred incidentally. These were sir Thomas More, lord Audley, sir Richard Southwell, sir Thomas Stradling, sir Nicholas Bacon, sir Thomas Cornewallys, sir Francis Englefield, sir Robert Southwell, sir Edward Waldegrave, William Cordall, esquire, Richard Gooderick, John Wyseman, sir Arthur Darcy, sir Gilbert Gerrard, lord Vaulx, sir Thomas Brydges, cardinal Pole, Thirlby bishop of Ely, sir Thomas Whyte, lord Williams of Thame, Whyte bishop of Winchester, and Thomas Slythurste, president of Trinity college so often mentioned.I need not repeat his last interview with sir THOMAS MORE: of whom it will be sufficient to add here, that he was the greatest ornament of the English nation at the restoration of polite literature; that he was a

man whose life and death are equal prodigies, and whose valuable virtues and untimely fate are alike admired and lamentedErasmus who always preserved the highest opinion of More, has, with great elegance and truth, drawn his character at full length, EPIST. 447. See also 605. More was among Erasmus's most intimate friends.. THOMAS lord AUDLEY, made lord high chancellor of England on sir Thomas More's resignation in 1533, was probably sir Thomas Pope's particular patron, and perhaps not a little instrumental towards his rise in the world, as has been already hinted. In how great confidence and esteem sir Thomas was held by lord Audley, is further manifested, from his being appointed, with sir Edward North, and two others, an executor of lord Audley's willRegistr. Allen. Cur. Praerog. qu. i. dat. April. xix. 1544; in which, among several other directions, they are requested to deliver, the next new year's day after his decease, one hundred pounds to the king; from whom the testator professes to have received all his reputations and benefitsHe bequeathes the residue of his plate, goods, and chattels, to lady Elizabeth his wife, sir Edward North, and sir THOMAS POPE, knights, and his servants Edmond Martyn and Thomas Barbour. And "the sum of ccljl. to either of the said sir Edward and sir THOMAS.". Few of the favorites of Henry the eighth appear to have more successfully recommended themselves to their sovereign than

lord Audley. But although by his perseverance in the business of the Divorce, and the dissolution of the monasteries, he so gratified the kings private views, as "to sustain, according to his own declaration, much damage and infamy;" yet the best historians admit, that he opposed the dangerous designs of his arbitrary master in a matter of the highest importance. In 1539, many severe acts were made, in which those styled the six bloody articles were included; and the prerogative was carried to such an enormous height, that the king's proclamation was allowed to attain the force of a law. It does not very plainly appear who were his majesty's principal counsellors in this affair: but we are assured, by concurrent and undoubted authorities, that the rigorous execution of those laws which the king had at first intended, was prevented by the spirited interposition of lord AudleySee BIOGRAPH. BRIT. Vol. i. AUDLEY.. But I forbear entering further into the history of this distinguished statesman and lawyer; who bore so considerable and so public a share in the most important transactions of the reign of Henry the eighth. I shall only add, that with sir Thomas Pope, he was an encourager of literature; and the founder, or restorer, of

Magdalen college in CambridgeFuller, Hist. Cambr. pag. 120.. Sir RICHARD SOUTHWELL was one of the chief mourners at sir Thomas Pope's burial. He was educated at Bennet college in Cambridge, and from thence removed to the inns of courtStrype, Eccl. Mem. i. 385.. He was summoned, in 1537, with many lords and knights, to attend the baptism of prince EdwardIbid. ii. 5.. He was a visitor at the dissolution of religious housesRymer, Foed. xiv. 558., privy counsellor to Henry the eighth, and an executor of his willMaster's History of C. C. C. C. p. 373.. In 1545, although a strict catholic, he protected, in his house called the Charter-house at London, his tutor at Cambridge, one John Loude, a polite scholar, who was persecuted for heresy, being a friend to his literature notwithstanding his religionStrype, ut supr. i. 386.. When sir Thomas More was committed to the tower, he was sent by the king, with Rich the sollicitor-general, to take away More's booksSee this whole transaction in the STATE TRYALS.. Henry the eighth left him by will two hundred poundsRymer, Foed. xv. 117.. In the

reign of Edward the sixth, he was appointed one of the counsellors to the young king, during his minorityStrype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 457.. In 1551, he was concerned with lord Wriothesley, and others, in bringing about the fall of the protector Somerset; who was become odious to the people on accont of his ambitious views, and the riches he had amassed in plundering the revenues of the church and crown. But in consequence of this intrigue, which was deemed a faction, he was imprisoned, but pardoned. At the accession of Mary, he received a grant from the queen of an annual pension of one hundred poundsThis affair is related, perhaps with some partiality, in an old treatise entitled, "A short treatise of politike power and of the true obedience, etc. Compyled by D. J. P. B. R. VV. 1556." 12mo. It is supposed to be written by Doctor John Poynet bishop of Rochester, then of Winchester. See signat. iiii. The book appears to be printed abroad. See supr. p. 58., for his services in opposing the duke of Northumberland who disputed her title, and was accordingly beheaded for rebellionRymer, Foed. xv. 355.. In the same reign, 1553, he was master of the ordinance and armoryViz. Maii 2. Lit. Pat. Mar. an. reg. i. Par. 4. With a salary of cc marcs.; the nature of which, at that time, appears from the following warrant, requiring him to deliver, "towardes the furniture

of the bande of horsemen, appointed presently to attend upon her Grace, theis parcells of armour; four hundred demy launces, with all their furniture, five hundred corseletts, one hundred and fiftie shirtes of mail, with morions to the same." Afterwards mention is made of "two hundred bowes, with sheffs of arrowes, two grosse of bowstringes, fifty partizans [halberds] and five hundred pikesBurghley's State Papers, p. 166. 169.." In 1554, the queen gave him a licence for forty retainersSee Eccl. Mem. iii. 480., an honor only granted to persons of uncommon distinction. In this reign he was also one of the privy council, and repeatedly joined in the most important commissionsBurghley's Pap. ut supr. passim. And Strype, Rymer, &c.; one of which he executed in conjunction with sir Thomas Pope. In the first year of queen Elizabeth, he was continued master of the ordinance and armory; when he made suit to the lords, that he might exhibit a declaration of the state of his office, and of the military stores then remaining in his posession. In a letter to Slythurste, the first president of Trinity college, dated Whitmonday 1558, sir Thomas Pope proposes to place his son in law

John Beresford abovementioned, a student in his college, and concerning whose success in life he appears to have been very sollicitous, as a page with sir Richard Southwell, and his brother sir Robert, "to lerne there amonge his [sir Richard's] childern, the Latin tonge, the French tonge, and to playe at weponsSir Richard Southwell's children were placed, in his own house, under the care of John Loude. Of whom he used to say, "He will make my boy, like himself, too good a Latinist, and too great a heretic." Stype, Eccl. Mem. i. 386.Tusser the poet, in his HUSBANDRIE, mentions sir Richard Southwell, as a most bountiful patron. Edit. 1593, 4to. pag. 159.." These at this time, were probably the sole and complete accomplishments of a gentleman. Sir THOMAS STRADLINGKnighted Feb. 17. 3 Edw. vi. MSS. Cotton. Claud. C. 3. fol. 190., another of the chief mourners at sir Thomas Pope's funeral, was of saint Donat's castle in Glamorganshire. When queen Mary succeeded to the crownIn the reign of Henry viii. the king grants "Thomae Stradlyng, uni Dapiferorum suorum, officium Bedelli" of certain lordships in Glamorganshire, &c. Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. An. 17. Sept. 19., 1553, he was appointed, with others, a muster-master to the queen's armyBurghley's State Papers, p. 158., and a commissioner for the marches of WalesIbid. 201.. In the same

year he was representative in parliament for East-Grinstead in Sussex; and, the following year for Arundel in the same countyWillis, Notit. Parl. p. 30. 38.. In 1558, he was joined with sir Thomas Pope, and others, in a commission, before mentioned at large, for the suppression of hereticsSee supr. p. 52.. He was father of sir Edward Stradling, remarkable in the reign of Elizabeth, for his critical skill in the British language, and his patronage of the Welch antiquarian literatureSee Joannis Stradlingi EPIGRAMMATUM libri quatuor. Lond. 1607, 8vo. He was nephew to sir Edward. lib. i. pag. 3. See also Wood's ATH. OXON. i. 350, 351.. Sir Thomas Stradling magnificently repaired the ancient castle of saint Donat'sAs appears from an epitaph upon him in Stradling's epigrams, where are the following lines. p. 10.
Hic Donataea quondam fulgebat in arce,Castra diu proavis nobilitata suis.Omnia quae vincit, castra haec absumpserat aetas,Hujus at ingenio paene novata vides.; and built saint Mary's chapel, adjoining to saint Donat's church, in which he was buriedWood, ut supr..Sir NICHOLAS BACON, one of the executors of sir Thomas Pope's will, in which he likewise remembers him with a token of

affection, calling him moreover "his most true and assured friend," was sir Thomas Pope's neighbour at Gorhambury near saint Alban's; where he built in 1566, a beautiful house, which still remains a monument of ancient magnificence and manners, with much of its original furniture and decorationsIn Aubrey's MSS. LIVES, Mus. Ashmol. is a particular description of it.—It is now destroyed, 1779.. He was likewise sollicitorBatteley's edition of Somner's CANTERBURY. App. p. 118. Birch's Mem. of Q. Elizabeth, i. 10., while sir Thomas was treasurer, of the first court of Augmentations. During the reign of Henry the eighth, having enjoyed many marks of royal favor, more from virtuous industy than from mean submission, he was made by queen Elizabeth, 1559, lord keeper of the great seal, and a privy counsellorDugd. Bar. ii. 437. And Orig. Jurid. Chron. ser. p. 90.. In these stations, he behaved with that wisdom and integrity which their importance and dignity required. To this character it may be superfluous to add, what alone might supply the place of a prolix panegyric, that he was the father of Francis lord Verulam.Sir THOMAS CORNEWALLYS, one of the Overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, all

whom he styles his most trusty and loving friends, was sheriff of Norfolk just before queen Mary's accession, where he raised a considerable force against those disaffected and factious subjects who opposed her title. For this seasonable and serviceable assistance, he was immediately made one of her privy council, treasurer of CalaisViz. Maii 7. Lit. pat. 1 Mar. par. 7., and comptroller of her housholdDugd. BAR. ii. 480. And from his monument in the church of Brome, co. Suffolk. See Wever, FUN. MON. p. 764.. When it was debated in council to send the princess Elizabeth out of the kingdom, in order that she might be excluded from the succession, he boldly dissuaded the queen from a proceeding at once unjust and imprudentCamden's Eliz. edit. Hearne. Vol. i. APPARATUS, p. 21.. Sir FRANCIS ENGLEFIELD, a second overseer of sir Thomas Pope's will, and joined with him in a commission, was knighted by Edward the sixthDugdale's Warw. ed. 2. ii. 891., but afterwards imprisoned in the Tower by the protector Somerset, because he concurred with sir Edward Waldegrave, and others, in suppressing the commands of the privy council for the prohibition of mass in the family of his mistress the princess Mary, with whom he then resided at Copped-hall in EssexStrype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 253. seq..

But when Mary, succeeded to the throne, he was constituted a privy-counsellor, constable of Windsor castle, and master of the great wardrobeBurnet, Ref. ii. 308. Collins Peer. iii. 259. ed. 2.—And Lit. pat. Mar. an reg. i. par. 6. Et ibid. par. 10.. She also granted him one hundred retainersStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.. In the reign of Elizabeth, he left the kingdom, and retiring into Spain, became a zealous advocate to king Philip in favor of Mary queen of ScotsStrype, Ann. Ref. i. 371.. But Elizabeth, highly provoked at the insolence of a man who presumed to plead the cause of a lady more beautiful than herself, commanded him to be outlawed and attaintedSee case in Coke's Reports, p. vii. fol. 11.—And Strype, Ann. Ref. ii. 26. 538. iii. 246, &c.. This bigotted knight was much offended at the singular forbearance and indulgence shewn to the celebrated Roger Ascham, whom he looked upon as a most dangerous heretic, during the rigid reign of queen Mary: but there are papers to prove, that it was principally by sir Thomas Pope's influence and earnest interposition, that Englefield was persuaded to abandon a violent prosecution which he had commenced against AschamSee Strype's Life of Sir T. Smyth, p. 65. I was informed by the late sir Harry Pope-Blount, that a most valuable portrait of Roger Ascham, painted by Hans Holbein, was removed from Tyttenhanger-house, about the reign of king William. This had undoubtedly been placed there by sir Thomas Pope. See supr. p. 81..

Sir ROBERT SOUTHWELL, another of the overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, and brother to sir Richard, was made master of the rolls, 1542, by Henry the eighthDugd. Orig. Jurid. Chron. Ser. p. 85., and continued in that office till about the middle of Edward the sixth, 1550Ibid. p. 89.. In 1542, he was representative in parliament for the county of Surrey, and often afterwards for the county of Kent, and several boroughs, in the reigns of Edward and MaryWillis, Notit. Parl. p. 7, 20, 21, 27, 49, 56.. He was a receiver of abby lands from Henry the eighthTanner, Notit. Mon. fol. edit. p. 228, 535, 560.. He died in November, 1559Strype, Ann. Ref. i. 193.. Queen Mary granted him twenty retainersStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.. He was appointed a delegate and commissary in the first year of queen Mary, with many civilians, and others of the first honor and quality, for the restitution of bishop BonnerStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 23. See also ibid. 289.. He was one of the attornies, while sir Thomas Pope was treasurer, of the court of augmentationsWeever, Fun. Mon. pag. 109..

 Sir EDWARD WALDEGRAVE, another of the overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, was a principal officer in the houshold of the princess Mary, and committed to close imprisonment to the Tower, with sir Francis Englefield, and sir Robert Rochester, for omitting to forbid the celebration of mass in her houseStrype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 253. seq.. The princess when she succeeded to the crown, had him much in esteem; and in consideration of his sufferings and unshaken constancy, she constituted him a privy-counsellor, master of the great wardrobeViz. Jan. 16. Lit. pat. Mar. an. reg. 1. par. 2., and chancellor of the duchy of LancasterCollins, Peer. iii. 553. ed. 2.. He was created knight of the carpet, by lord Arundel, the day following her majesty's coronationCollins, ibid. But see Strype, ut supr. iii. Append. p. 11.. He was appointed one of the executors of cardinal Pole's will; in which the cardinal assigns him a gratuity of fifty poundsLife of Pole, P. ii.. In the year 1561, he was ordered, with his lady, to the Tower, for hearing mass in his familyStrype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 233.. Strype, in the spirit of his honest simplicity, tells usIbid.,

that "this knight and his lady had the character of very good alms-folks, in respect of their great liberality to the Poor." Three other Overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will were sir William Cordall, Richard Gooderyke, and John Wyseman. Sir WILLIAM CORDALL was lent reader of Lincoln's inn, 1553Dugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 252. col. 2., and afterwards frequently governor of that houseIbid. 260. col. 1.. In the same year he was appointed sollicitor-general, by queen MaryIbid. Chron. Ser. p. 81.—In the patent he appears to have belonged to the court of Augmentations. Lit. pat. Mar. an. reg. 1. par. 8.; and in 1557, master of the rollsDugd. ibid. p. 91.. Sir Thomas Pope mentions him in this capacity, in a letter to the president of his college, dated at Clerkenwell, on Whitmonday, 1558. "I shall buy of the master of the rolles, ii fayre manors with two advowsons in Lyncolnshere which I entende to gyve to my collegge, &cEx Orig. Thes. coll. Trin. ut supr.." He was one of Mary's privy counsellorsCouncil-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr., who granted him the privilege of twelve retainersStrype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.. He was one of the executors of cardinal Pole's will,

with a bequest of fifty poundsLife of Pole, P. ii.. He was likewise an executor, and is styled a beloved friend, of the great earl of DorsetEx testam. 8 Eliz. apud Collins Peer i. 517. ed. i.. In 1558 he was speaker of the house of CommonsWillis, Not. Parl. SPEAKERS, pag. 113.. The mastership of the rolls he kept late in the reign of Elizabeth, with much respect, till 1581Dugd. ubi supr. p. 97.. William Lambarde's famous book, entitled ARCHAIONOMIA or system of Saxon laws, translated into Latin, and printed at London in 1568, is dedicated to this sir William Cordall; and in the dedication, the learned editor acknowledges the many obligations and encouragements he had received from sir William's patronage in the prosecution of that valuable work. Abraham Fleming also dedicates his translation of The General Doctrine of Earthquakes to this worthy patronLond. 1580. 8vo.. He is said to have been a great encourager of Saxton, who published maps of England, in the reign of queen ElizabethHearne's coll. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. vol. 123. p. 143.. He was appointed visitor of saint John's college in Oxford, during life, by the founder sir Thomas Whyte; and is supposed to have

drawn up the statutes of that society by the founder's desireHis arms were in the windows of the chapel and hall of saint John's college. Hutton's Collections, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. p. 202. In Museol. Bibl. They have been long since destroyed. There is a curious old picture of him, in saint John's college, by one Cornelius de Zeem. These statutes are digested from those of New-College in the same University.. He lived at Long-Melford in SuffolkCollins, Peer. ii. 266. ed. i. He sounded a hospital, at Long-Melford, for a warden and twelve brethren. Strype's PARRER, p. 23. B. i. ch. vi.: and, in 1578, gave example for the magnificent feasting of queen Elizabeth in that county; into which her majesty was received by three troops, one of two hundred young gentlemen cloathed in white velvet, another of three hundred gentlemen of the county apparelled in black velvet coats and costly chains, and a third of fifteen hundred attendants well mounted on horsebackHollingshed, Chron. iii. 1287. Compare Weever, p. 748. And Camd. ELIZ. vol. ii. p. 322. edit. Hearne.. RICHARD GOODERYKE appears to have been a lawyer of great eminence; and his name is frequently mentioned, with other chief lawyers and noblemen, in various commissions and proclamations, during the reigns of Henry the eighth, Edward, Mary, and ElizabethStrype, Eccl. Mem. and Ann. passim.. Leland, in

the ENCOMIAPrincipum ac illustrium aliquot et eruditorum in Anglia virotum ENCOMIA, &c. edit. 1589. qu. pag. 108. In the preface to Ascham's SCHOLEMASTER, printed 1589, sir Richard Sackville at a conference with Ascham about education, mentions, "our deare frende, good master Goodericke, whose judgment I cold well beleeve, &c." This is perhaps the same. of illustrious persons, compliments him when a young man, for his promising virtues and abilities; and from thence infers his future reputation in the profession of the lawAd RICARDUM GOCDERICIUM.Magnificum retines, GODERICI candide, nomen,Quod vel Saxonicum recte idioma probat.Sic bonus ac dives diceris jure latino;Moribus hoc nomen convenit omne tuis.Nominis illa tui, tam bella notatio non teConstituit ditem, constituitve bonum.Splendida felicem te virtus reddidit una,Macte hac virtute, et dona beata feres.Causidico sic sama foro tua, lausque nitebit,Et te patronum percolet ipse cliens.Nec sic contentus virtuti imponere morem,Suspice doctrinae lumina clara piae.Illa tuas possunt ad coelum tollere laudes, Te quoque per niveas condecorare notas.. He was an attorneyRym. Foed. xv. 334., while sir Thomas Pope was master of the woods, of the second court of Augmentations. Edward the sixth, in 1551, granted him an annuity of one hundred poundsStrype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 498.. He was often a representative in parliamentWillis, Notit. Parl. pp. 12. 73. 91.. He was

born in Yorkshire 1524Collins, Bar. ii. 259., and was high-sheriff of that county 1579Drake's Eborac. p. 354.. He was nearly related to Goodryke bishop of Ely, high chancellor of EnglandCollins, ubi supr. See Strype's CRANMER, p. 221.. JOHN WYSEMANSir Thomas Pope is licenced to alienate to this John Wyseman, and others, the manors of Ditton, Brampton, and Syflington, in Kent. Pat. Phil. Mar. 3. 4. Test Apr. 9. Par. 8. was of Canfield-Hall in EssexCollins, Peer. p. 530. Waldegrave. Ed. ii.. I find him one of the commissioners for certifying to Henry the eighth, the value of all the monastic and other spiritual foundations in the county of EssexIn the instrument he is styled Auditor. I suppose of the exchequer, or augmentation office. Dated 26 Hen. viii. Jan. 30. MSS. Tanner. Bibl. Bodl.. He was a member of parliament, in 1554, for Malden in Essex: and in the following year, for East-Grinstead in SussexWillis Not. Parl. p. 42. 51..Sir ARTHUR DARCY, to whom sir Thomas Pope bequeathes a valuable memorial in his will, and with whom he was joined in a commission, is said to have been "a soldier of great fidelitie and trustLetter of sir Ph. Hoby in Burghley's State papers, ut supr. p. 125.." Upon information

given to Henry the eighth, that the emperor Charles the fifth had threatened war against England, in 1532, and by some secret negotiations, engaged James the fourth of Scotland to his assistance; he entered Scotland with an army, and wasted the country. In the same year he was deputed captain of the Isle of Jersey; and afterwards, in 1551, by Edward the sixth, lieutenant of the tower of LondonDugd. Bar. i. 374. seq. And MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 284.—61. fol. 94. He was made knight of the garter at Greenwich, Apr. 23. 6 Edw. vi. Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. 446.. He was moreover an encourager of polite learning, then begining to grow fashionable, as we learn from Leland; who addresses a copy of verses to him in the ENCOMIALeland calls him,Doctrinae eximium POLITIORISCultorem.—p. 36. edit. ut supr,; and says, that sir Arthur Darcy was present, and countenanced him when he presented, in 1545, his new years gift to the KingLeland, ibid.. Sir GILBERT GERARD, to whom sir Thomas Pope also leaves a memorial, was autumnal reader of Gray's-inn, 1553Dugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 293. col. 2.; and in the following year, treasurer of that society with Nicholas BaconIbid. p. 298. col. 1.. He was appointed, by

queen Elizabeth, at her accession, 1559, attorney generalIbid. Chron. Ser. p. 91., and on the death of sir William Cordall, in 1588, master of the rollsDugd. ubi supr. p. 97.; in which station he remained till 1594Ibid. p. 99. He was knighted at Greenwich, 1579. 5 Jul. MSS. Cotton. Claud, C. 3. fol. 245. b., when he probably died. The memorable William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, appointed him in 1569, with others his good lords and friends, an overseer of his will, with a reward of fifty pounds, to be given him in money, plate, or jewelsRegistr. LYON. Cur. Praer. Cant. qu. 15.. WILLIAM Lord VAULX, of Harwedon, to whom sir Thomas Pope leaves a legacy of one hundred pounds, was summoned to parliament 1557. He founded an hospital at Irtlingburgh in NorthamptonshireDugd. Bar. ii. 305.. In 1582, he was accused before lord Burghley and sir Walter Mildmay, and heavily fined, for harbouring Campion the jesuit, but was afterwards reconciled to the queenStrype, Ann. Ref. iii. 126. And MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 859. 4.. Notwithstanding this popish attachment, he was one of the noblemen appointed to conduct her majesty from Hatfield

to London, on the Death of her sister MaryStrype, ibid i. Append. p. 3.. Sir THOMAS BRYDGES, to whom, by the name of Mr. Thomas Abrydge, sir Thomas Pope also bequeathes a remembrance, was brother to John first earl of ChandoisSee Strype. . iii. 64. 478.. In Mary's reign he was lieutenant of the Tower of LondonBoth sir John and sir Thomas Bridges, knights, occur lieutenants of the tower in Q. Mary's reign. Baker's Collectan. ex MSS. Camden. Brit. Mus. 7033. Vol. vi. pag. 341. As was Edmund, the second earl. Dugd. Bar ii. 395. See Hollingshead, iii. 1099 1100. 1103. In one of which places sir John is put for sir Thomas.. Fox mentions a friendly religious conference between him, secetary Bourne, and Bishop Ridley, in the TowerMartyrol. ii. 1297.. When the princess Elizabeth was confined in the tower, he saved her life, by detecting and communicating a plot which bishop Gardiner is said to have contrived for her immediate executionHollingsh. ut supr. pag. 1130.. When he led, as lieutenant of the tower, lady Jane Gray to the scaffold, he begged her to bestow on him some small present, which he might keep as a perpetual memorial of herIbid. 1100.. She gave him her tablebook, where she had just written three sentences on seeing her husband's headless body

carried back to the tower in a cart. They were written one in Greek, another in Latin, and a third in EnglishHeylin, 167. But by mistake he says it was sir John Gage. See what is said of sir Thomas Brydges, supr. p. 45. And of John lord Chandois, p. 69. It may be added, that this Thomas, or sir, Bridges, who was of Cornebury in Oxfordshire, occurs in a grant of lands to sir T. POPE, Pat. 31. Hen. viii. par. 4. And sir Thomas Bridges is mentioned as one of the gentlemen of Oxfordshire, present at Cranmer's execution. Strype's Cranmer, pag. 384. b. iii. ch. 21. I presume he had some appointment in the court of Henry viii. For he attended at the funeral of the king; on which occasion he bore the dragon-standard between two serjeants at arms with their maces. Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. Append. Numb. x. He was a considerable sharer of abbey lands in Oxfordshire, with Sir T. POPE; particularly of the lands of the monastery of Bruerne: As appears by the patent above cited. In his Will, he mentions the Mansion-house of Bruerne; which, I suppose, was the monastery. Also the demesnes of that house, and several of its estates. In the same will he bequeathes to lord Chandois twenty corslets: to his son Henry the rest of armour, and his best chain of gold. To lord Grey of Wilton, in consideration of his loss by being apprehended at Gynes, 50l. TESTAM. Th. Brydges. dat. Octob. 18, 1559. Probat. Feb. 13, 1559. In. Cur. Praerog. Cant. registr. Melersh, qu. 13. He received from Edward vi. a grant of the abbey of Keinsham near Bristol. Tanner's Not. Mon. edit. fol. pag. 469.. That sir Thomas Pope was nearly connected with CARDINAL POLE, appears from passages in his letters. I have before mentioned his application to the cardinal, for obtaining a licence for three of his fellows to preach. Sir Thomas Pope in a letter to the president of his college, 1558,

speaks of procuring a prebend for one Heywood, and adds, "my lord cardinalls Grace and my lord of Elie [Thirlby] are both willing." In another letter to the same, dated 1557, he says, "Towching Mr. Heywood's recompens, I wold be glad to understonde what he wold have; and theruppon wold make my sute to my lord cardinall's Grace, and my lord of Elie, accordinglieThis Mr. Heywood was Richard Hayward, rector of Garsington, in Oxfordshire, to which he was presented by the crown about August, 1556. Rym. Foed. xv. p. 442. The next year sir Thomas Pope purchased the said rectory of Philip and Mary, and annexed it to the presidentship of Trinity college. This application to cardinal Pole, and the bishop of Ely, was undoubtedly to dispossess Hayward, by procuring him some equivalent, that the president might immediately succeed to the rectory. Which appears to have been done, yet not without some difficulty, nor in consequence of these applications. Registr. prim. coll. Trin. fol. 122. b. Arthur Yeldard, President, was instituted to this rectory, on the resignation of R. Haywood, Sept. 8. 1562. REGISTR. Episcopat. Oxon. SEDE VACANT. fol. 219.." In another to the same, and on the same business, without date, he says, "my lord cardinall's grace has promised me a prebend of xxl." In another to the same, dated July the ninth, 1558, he tells the president, that if his son in law John Beresford, or Basford, mentioned above, then at Trinity college, should prove a good proficient

in the latin tongue, "I will not fail to sue to my lord cardinall's grace for him:" in order that he "might, as is said in another letter, attende uppon his grace." Of the cardinal's character it will be sufficient to observe, that he is more endeared to posterity by private virtues and amiable qualifications, than ennobled by birth and dignities. Instead of imbruing his hands in the blood of martyrs, and loading the consciences of mankind with arbitrary decrees and unnatural edicts, he corresponded with learned men, and introduced into England the pure and useful elegancies of classical compositionI have before referred the reader to Wood's HISTORY and ANTIQUITIES of the university of Oxford, for an account of Pole's visitation of the university. I will here add an anecdote relating to that transaction not mentioned by Wood. The cardinal finding saint Mary's college, (where Erasmus had studied, but which had been dissolved as a seminary for various monasteries of augustine canons,) although very ruinous, a place which might be made convenient for the reception of students, ordered it to be repaired and fitted up for that purpose, Sept. 17. 1556. Accordingly, a principal was appointed to it: yet on condition, that he should resign his office, in case the cardinal should ever be disposed to convert the said college into a house of religious. The principal's name was Alexander Elcocke, A.M. But John Wayte lord of the soil of the said college refused entry to the new principal into the premisses, "ut paret cubicula studiosis." Registr. Cur. Cancell. Oxon. GG. fol. 63. in Archiv. Univ. Oxon. I know not what was the immediate consequence of this proceeding: but it is certain that neither of the cardinal's schemes took effect. Erasmus in some of hi Epistles speaks feelingly of the repose which he enjoyed, and the felicity with which he prosecuted his studies, for two years, in this retired house. The chapel, no inelegant fabric, containing the curious monuments of the founder Thomas Holden and his wife, together with the cloister, was not completely demolished till the year 1656. Nothing now remains but a part of the gatehouse, which fronts westward..

Sir Thomas Pope submitted to the cardinal the statutes of his college, as appears from a letter to the President: which, while it pays a compliment to the cardinal's taste, likewise illustrates what has been before observed about the state of literature at this period. "My lord cardinall's grace has had the overseeinge of my statutes. He much lykes well that I have therein ordered the latin tongeThe classics. to be redde to my schollers. But he advyses me to order the greeke to be more taught there, than I have provyded. This purpose I well lyke: but I fear the tymes will not bear it nowVid. supr. p. 156.. I remember when I was a yong scholler at Eton, the greeke tongue was growing apace: the studie of which is now alate much decaidTo the president. dat. Hatfield. 1556.." The passages in the letters above cited likewise inform us, how far

sir Thomas Pope was connected with THIRLBY, bishop of ElySee also Append. Numb. xix.. He was constituted the first, and only bishop of Westminster by Henry the eighthBurnet, Ref. Records. i. 246.. He was, by Edward the sixth, translated to Norwich, and afterwards by queen Mary to Ely; by whom he was also appointed a privy counsellorGoodwyn, ut supr. p. 333., and joined in commission with sir Thomas Pope and others for the suppression of hereticsSee supr. p. 52.. By all these princes he was much esteemed for his experience in political affairs, and frequently employed as an envoy to foreign courts. In the reign of Elizabeth he was ejected and imprisoned for persevering in popery; but was afterwards received into the family of archbishop Parker, who, not more on account of his former dignity, than of his learning, candor, and affability, treated him with due respect and humanityGoodwyn, ubi supr.. WHYTE, bishop of Winchester, became the first visitor of Trinity college in Oxford. It is reasonable to suppose, that sir Thomas Pope's real motive for appointing the bishops of Winchester to be visitors of his college,

originated from Gardiner, who was the bishop of Winchester when the foundation was projected; and who, moreover, had been governor of a college at Cambridge; was now chancellor of that university, a learned civilian, a scholar of the first rank, an eminent patron of literatureGardiner's literary character has been commonly overlooked in his political, and is rarely regarded or acknowledged. He was admirably skilled in the Greek language, at a time when it was cultivated in England only by a few neglected scholars. His ideas of pure Latinity were refined to a fault; and he carried his notions of the chaste Roman phraseology to such a nicety, as to be esteemed a Ciceronian by his cotemporaries. Leland, the most polite classical writer in England at that period, congratulates some of his elegant friends, on their being educated in the college over which Gardiner presided at Cambridge; and which, under such a governor, had become the seat of eloquence and of the choir of the Muses. Leland also characterises Gardiner by the epithet DISERTUS, or the master of genuine Latinity; and calls him the restorer of classical composition, and the study of philology, at Cambridge. EXCOM. p. 100. edit. 1589. Leland paid these compliments before Gardiner was a bishop, and when there were no temptations to flattery. Many of Ascham's terse Latin epistles are addressed to this prelate: in which, his distinguished learning, his sollicitude for the revival of ancient letters, and his general patronage, are repeatedly displayed in the highest yet unaffected terms of panegyric. In one of these, Ascham expresses his great satisfaction, that Gardiner, who excells all others in critical discernment, had so warmly approved his TOXOPHILUS, then just published, and written with a view to teach a just English style; and desires that the bishop, pro eo amore quo literas et earum cultores unice amplecteris, would recommend that book to the king. Lib. ii. p. 85. b. edit. 1581. In another, he thanks the bishop for honouring him with so many marks of notice and attention, when he came, an unknown and obscure academic, to court. He recommends a tutor to the duke of Norfolk's nephew; and wishes that Gardiner, who is so eminent a judge and protector of literary merit, would ratify the choice. Ibid. p. 92. a. In a third, lamenting the untimely death of king Edward the sixth, he petitions Gardiner among other requests, to intercede with queen Mary, for the continuance of his pension originally granted by king Henry the eighth, as a reward for his TOXOPHILUS: professing his confidence in the bishop's known erudition, authority, liberality, prudence, and activity, to quiet the distractions which not only the civil but literary state of the kingdom would probably suffer, from that unexpected and calamitous event. Ibid. p. 154. b. Dat. 1553. In the next, he presents the bishop, then just released from imprisonment in the TOWER at the accession of Mary, with a Greek TRANSLATION of the PSALMS, probably the METAPHRASE of APOLLINARIUS: enforcing the propriety of his present by observing, that it was written in a language in which the bishop so much delighted, and that poetry had been his chief amusement during the tedious hours of his late confinement. Ibid. p. 157. b. See also, p. 65. a. With the next, dated 1554, as a slender remembrance of the numerous favors he had recently received, he sends the bishop an antient golden Roman coin. Ibid. p. 163. a. In three or four others, evidently written during the reign of Mary, he complains of many unjust taxations and oppressive exactions, imposed by some late innovators on the university of Cambridge; supplicating the assistance of Gardiner as their CHANCELLOR, and expatiating largely on his accustomed indefatigable endeavours to support the rights and promote the honour of the university. Ibid. p. 194. b. seq. In another letter, to one of Margaret Roper's learned daughters, dated 1554, Ascham speaks of being called from Cambridge by the special favour and appointment of bishop Gardiner, to serve the queen in the very liberal office of Latin secretary. Ibid. p. 162. b. In a letter to the learned Sturmius, dated at Greenwich 1555, he declares, "I would not exchange the Office of Latin Secretary for any situation in life. Bishop Gardiner has treated me with the greatest kindness and indulgence in this affair: and I can hardly say, whether Lord Pagett has shewn more readiness in naming me to the queen, or the bishop in pleading my cause and recommending my character. There are some who have endeavoured to stop the course of the bishop's benevolence, on account of my religious principles, but without effect. I therefore am deeply indebted to his humanity, and it is a debt which I willingly owe. I am indeed but one among many who have experienced his generosity. I have often thought of talking to him about your noble work of the ANALYTICS. For I well know his predilection to polite letters, and think his patronage would be of service on this occasion, &c." Ibid. p. 45. b. seq. It appears also, that Gardiner procured from queen Mary for Ascham, a renewal of the royal pension for his TOXOPHILUS, with the annual addition of ten pounds. IBID. ibid. p. 45. b. And Grant's VITA, p. 21. Ascham's LATIN. EPIST. edit. Oxon 1703. By the same interest, Ascham was suffered to keep his fellowship and public orator's place at Cambridge, during a long absence from the university, while he was Latin secretary and abroad in Germany. Ibid. p. 22. Nor was Ascham the only learned protestant whom Gardiner countenanced in the reign of queen Mary. Throughout the persecutions of that unhappy period, he permitted Sir Thomas Smith, one of the restorers of Greek, and secretary of state in the reign of Edward the sixth, to enjoy the comforts of a studious retirement with a pension of one hundred pounds. Strype's SMITH, p 60. seq. I forbear to enlarge on Gardiner's high celebrity as a civilian and canonist: and shall only add on that head, that Henry the eighth would take no step in the business of his divorce, however eager for a decision, till Gardiner could be consulted, who was absent at Rome. I suspect he was but moderately skilled in scholastic theology., and bore the greatest

sway in all civil and ecclesiastical affairs. But Gardiner dying while the statutes were yet

under consideration, and Whyte succeeding to the bishoprick, although not confirmed till

after they were actually delivered to the new societyGardiner died in Novemb. 1555. The statutes of Trinity college were given May i. 1556. The bulle of pope Paul iv. for Whyte's translation and inthronisation is dated, Prid. Non. Jul. 1556. He was inthroned Sept. 21. 1556. Registr. WHYTE, Episc. Winton. fol. 1. a. seq.Some say, that upon Gardiner's decease it was intended cardinal Pole should hold the see of Winton with that of Canterbury in commendam. But this scheme being found unpopular or impracticable, Whyte was bound to pay Pole yearly 1000l. out of his episcopal revenues, for the better support of the cardinal's dignity. See Wood, Athen. Oxon. i. 132. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 387. Goodwyn de Praesul. ut supr., the founder by this unexpected change of circumstances was not so far reduced to a state of indetermination and indifference, as to wish to depart from his appointment. Sir Thomas Pope in a letter to the president of the college, dated May the twenty-sixth, 1558, acknowledges a very particular favor, which "my lord of Wynchester and others the commissioners for spiritual matters," had promised to grant him for the college. In another letter, dated the same year, to the same, he says "my lord of Wynchester has bene sycke with me at Tyttenhanger, but now returns to the corte. He has promysed to give his coat-armur for the grete

glas-windowe ther in my hallI presume in the hall of his house at Tyttenhanger. It was customary for guests of rank, after a long visit, to give an escocheon of their arms in painted glass to the bow-window of the hall. An estimate of the price of painted glass, particularly of ARMS, in the preceding century, may be partly gathered from the following disbursement for painting the ARMS of bishop William of Wykeham, founder of New-college Oxford, in windows of the churches of Newton-Longueville, Whaddon, and Great-Horwood, Bucks. "Solutum VITRIARIO de Aylsbury pro ARMIS domini fundatoris positis in Ecclesiis de Newnton, Whaddon, et Horwoode, xiijs. iiijd." Comp. Burss Collegii Novi Oxon. A.D. 1479. See supr. p. 16.." In a manuscript greek psalter on vellum, in the college library, I find the following entry in sir Thomas Pope's own hand. "Mem. that the reverend father in god, John bushop of Wynton gave me three bokes. THO. POPESee Append. Numb. XXIX.." Whyte, who was first schoolmasterA.D. 1534. Tanner, Bibl. 761., and afterwards warden of Winchester collegeA.D. 1541. Willis, Mitr. Abb. i. 333., was made successively bishop of LincolnConsecrat. April. 1. 1554. Le Neve, Fast. p. 141. and WinchesterSee supr. p. 237. by queen MaryGoodwyn, p. 300.. He was a man of learning and eloquenceHe was not an inelegant latin poet. As a specimen of his latin poetry, he has left DIACOSIO-MARTYRION, sive ducentorum virorum testimonia de veritate corporis, etc. Lond. 4to. in aed. R. Cali. 1553. See also his verses on the marriage of Philip and Mary, Hollinsh. Chron. iii 1120. Wood, ubi supr. mentions one book of latin epigrams, MS. Fox has preserved many of his disputations, orations, &c. Fox and Pits, according to custom, have both equally gratified their respective prejudices in representing the character of this prelate. Pits says, "Erat sane vir pietate et doctrina conspicuus. Acutus poeta, orator eloquens, Theologus solidus, concionator nervosus." Angl. Script. Parifiis, 1619. pag. 763. The learned and candid archbishop Parker styles him, "ambitiosissimus antistes." Antiq. Eccl. pag. 527. edit. Drake.; but his

religious prejudices of course disqualified him from retaining his preferments after the first year of Elizabeth; who was much offended at the panegyric which he too liberally bestowed on Mary, when he preached at her funeralCouncil-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr. viz. Jan. 19. 1559. See Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 131. seq. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. App. 277. who has printed the sermon.; and soon afterwards commanded him to be imprisoned for making a public appearance in his pontifical vestmentsStrype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 145.. He had also incurred no small share of the queen's displeasure for his behaviour at the solemn conference held in Westminster-hall, before her majesty, the privy council, and both houses of parliament; at which, with three other catholic bishops, he was appointed to dispute against a select number of the reformed partySee Strype, ibid. ch. 5.. He was a benefactor to

both Wykeham's collegesTo New College, Oxon. he gave the manor of Hall-place in Hampshire. Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 131. To Winchester college he gave his mitre and crosier, a silver goblet gilt, a bason and ewer of silver, a rich carpet, with other valuable presents. E Registr. Benef. coll. Winton. In the warden's lodgings at Winchester, there was lately a bedchamber, with a curious old pannelled cieling; having in each compartment a cypher of the initials of Whyte's name, and of king Henry viii. It was put up by him in that reign. His epitaph, written by himself, remains on a large brass plate, under which he intended to de buried, in the antechapel of the college. But dying 11. Jan. 1559, he was interred in his cathedral. in which he had the happiness to be educated. Of sir Thomas Pope's intimacy with sir THOMAS WHYTE, the founder of saint John's college in Oxford, I have before mentioned proofsSee supr. p. 124.. And to these evidences we may add, that their interests and attachments tended the same way: for we find sir Thomas Whyte affording signal services to queen Mary against the rebel Wyat and his followers, while lord mayor of LondonHollinshed, Chron. iii. 1096.; in consequence of which, he was knighted by the queenMSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bodl.. But a similitude of undertakings for the propagation of letters might otherwise have naturally produced a friendship between sir Thomas Whyte and sir Thomas Pope; as they were both, at the same

time, employed in the same acts of public and literary beneficence. Lord WILLIAMS of THAME generously concurred with sir Thomas Pope in treating the princess Elizabeth, amidst her unmerited and oppressive persecutions, with proper regardSee supr. p. 71.. He is mentioned in a letter of sir Thomas Pope to the president of Trinity collegeIt is without date. Lord Williams is mentioned in another of his letters concerning a purchase.: "I wold be glad to lerne whether my lord Williams and Mr. AshfeldProbably sir Edmund Ashfield of Tame co. Oxon., gave the ii Buckes to my college at the [act] commensement." Lord Williams having enjoyed many eminent favors from Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth, was by queen Mary created a baron in reward for his faithful services at her accession. He continued to receive fresh honors from queen Elizabeth, and was appointed president of the council in the principality of WalesDugd. Bar. ii. 393.. Bishop Ridley, when bound to the stake, requested lord Williams then present, to sollicit queen Mary, that the episcopal leases which he had granted, while bishop of London, to many poor tenants, might remain and be confirmed. This was

the sole anxiety that disquieted the composure of the dying martyr. But lord Williams promised to recommend this petition to the utmost of his power, and it was accordingly performedFuller's Worthies, p. 109. Fox, Martyrolog..It is natural to suppose, that sir Thomas Pope was nearly connected with several other persons of eminence and distinction in the courts of Henry the eighth and queen Mary. That he was in high confidence and esteem with the latter, may, beside many other arguments, be concluded from a passage in the statutes of his college: by which it appears, that he expected her majesty, who professed herself so zealous a patroness to the university, together with king Philip, would honor the college with a royal visitStatut. coll. Trin. Oxon. "Nisi quando forsan Angliae Reges et Reginae, eorumve primogeniti, Collegium invisere dignabuntur: quos sic quidem advenientes, cum omni honore et obsequio excipiendos praecipio et statuo." cap. xxvi..But among his friends I must not forget to mention THOMAS SLYTHURSTESee more of him in Append. Numb. XXV., whom he appointed the first President of his college; and had before probably preferred, by

his interest with the queen, to a canonry of Windsor. He seems to have conceived a high opinion of Slythurste's learning and prudence; whom, from the trust committed to his charge, we reasonably may imagine to have been a person of distinguished worth and abilities. In a general Address to the new society, annexed to the statutes of the college, he particularly compliments the president for his remarkable moderation of temper, his eminent learning, experience, prudence, and probity; observing moreover, in justification of his choice, that he should have acted in vain, if he had not added to the benefit of his foundation such a governor, so properly qualified in every requisite accomplishment; one completely fitted for the difficult and critical task of conducting the first beginnings of a recent institution, and to whom therefore, borrowing the character of a father in that of a founder, he with pleasure entrusted the education of his children. On various occasions, sir Thomas Pope appears to have placed the greatest confidence in his friendship, advice, and judgement. Many of the founder's letters to Slythurste contain free consultations about adjusting the

endowment, amending the statutesIn the first copy of the statutes, dated 1556, signed by the founder, are several erasures and interlineations in the hand of Slythurste, made by the consent and authority of the founder: and the text of this copy thus corrected, is that which is now in use. Many of these alterations appear to have been made in this book, between them both at Tyttenhanger, or Clerkenwell, as I collect from a letter from the founder to the vice-president, dat. 28. Jan. 1557, in which he says, that he shall send by the president, an altered and improved copy of his statutes, which he had ordered to be forthwith ingrossed in parchment. In another letter to the president, dat. 25. Feb. 1557, the founder tells him, "I trust ye will not forget to make an INDEX CAPITULORUM STATUTORUM, which we forgott when we were together." In this copy, corrected by Slythurste's hand, London, the place from which they were originally dated, is struck out for TYTTENHANGER. The altered and improved copy, mentioned above, ingrossed on parchment, and signed with his own hand throughout, with the ADDITAMENT annexed, appears to have been delivered to the society, but with the original date of 1556 preserved, in, or soon after, April, 1558. See his letter, Append. Numb. XXV. Under JOHN PERTE., and regulating other articles of his young society; and sometimes relate to the domestic concerns of his own family. I find him frequently visiting the founder at Clerkenwell and Tyttenhanger. The sudden revolution, however, of religion, at the accession of queen Elizabeth, prevents us from knowing much more of his chaaracter and behaviour in this situation: for in September, 1559, he

was ejected from his headship by the Queen's visitors, and committed a prisoner to the Tower of London; where he died of grief, 1560, partly for the death of his honored friend and munificent patron the founder, and partly for the loss of his preferments.SECT. VIII.AN anecdote equally ridiculous and scandalous, has been propagated by Antony Wood, highly injurious to the honor of sir THOMAS POPE; which, notwithstanding it appears at first sight strongly to confute itself, I shall here examine and disproveAlthough possessed of the proper information and evidence, I had long ago, and for many reasons resolved, never to enter into a particular discussion of this idle calumny. But as, since the appearance of my first edition of this work, it has been circulated both in conversation, and by more biographers than one, as a pleasant ancedote, I could no longer forbear using the means in my power of exposing its falsity and futility. It originated from Henry Cuffe, the famous secretary of the unfortunate earl of Essex, who was executed, soon after his master, in 1601.Cuffe, being a boy of the most promising abilities and uncommon proficiency in literature, was sent at fifteen years of age, by Lady Elizabeth Powlett, often mentioned above, from Hinton saint George in Somersetshire, to Trinity college in Oxford, where he was elected scholar on the twentyfifth of May,

1578REGISTR. PRIM. fol. 37. b.. Within five years he was admitted fellow, May 30, 1583Ibid. fol. 42.. But even in this situation, the same discontented and arrogant spirit, which afterwards hurried him to an ignominious end, could not be suppressed. Soon after his admission, when he was now not more than twenty years of age, and in the year of his probation, he endeavoured to defame his founder by a false insinuation, which savored alike of petulance and ingratitude; and which, had it been true, deserved animadversion. The matter being reported to Lady Powlett the foundress, she transmitted a mandate to the college, ordering him to be instantly removed from his fellowship. This we learn from the words of the college register. "Resignante CUFFO, et locum Litteris Fundatricis danteIbid. fol. 42. b.." The cause of his amotion is twice mentioned by the Oxford antiquary. In the ATHENAE he says, that Cuffe "was forced to resign his fellowship of Trinity college, for speaking certain matters though true, which redounded to the great discredit of the FOUNDERATHEN. OXON. vol. i. col. 307. edit. 2.." In another place, however, he tells the whole story without

reserve, and produces his authority. "Doctor Bathurst told me that our Cuffe was of Trinity college, and expelled from thence upon this account: the founder, sir Thomas Pope, would, whersoever he he went visiting his friend, steal one thing or other he could lay his hands on, put it in his pocket, or under his gown. This was supposed rather an humour than of dishonesty. Now Cuffe, upon a time, with his fellows being merry, said, a pox this is a poor beggarly college indeed, the plate that our founder stole would build such another, which coming to the President's ears, he was thereupon ejectedSee Hearne's LIB. NIG. SCAC. p. 593.." The reader must have already noticed the glaring inconsistency of these two curious narratives. In the first, sir Thomas Pope, is by implication at least, represented as a thief: in the next, his dishonesty is softened into humour and jocularity. That the whole is a misrepresentation, and a jumble of circumstances, appears from an original paper in the hand-writing of Doctor Bathurst. "Secretary Cuffe was expelled from a fellowship of Trinity college, on this account. Our founder, when upon a visit, would often carry away a silver cup under

his gown for the joke-sake, sending it back the next day to laugh at his friend. Cuffe being merry at ANOTHER COLLEGE with some of his boon companions, said, A pox this is a beggarlie college indeed, the plate that our founder stole would build another as good. These words being told to the President, he was ejected. This I have often heard from my predecessour doctor president Kettell who was contemporarie with CuffeBATHURST PAPERS, MSS. In the possession of the late Mr. Payne, canon of Wells.." In the margin, Bathurst has recorded the name of the other college, which Cuffe was pleased to treat in such terms of contempt, and which needs not here to be mentioned. Indeed, it was no part of the accusation against Cuffe, that, as Wood's context insinuates, his pleasantry led him to depreciate the buildings of his founder: but that he wantonly converted one of his practical jokes, a species of humour not uncommon among our festive ancestors, into a petty larceny. On the whole, we now perceive that Wood has inaccurately related this story from a casual conversation with Bathurst, which he remembered as imperfectly. As to Cuffe, I know not whether he still continued at Oxford after this ejection. But

having great address, and much real merit, about three years afterwards, that is in the year 1586, he was chosen fellow of Merton college. Being an admirable Grecian, he was about the same time made professor of Greek in the university. It was in this department, that he assisted Columbanius in the first edition of Longus's elegant PASTORAL ROMANCE, which was printed at Florence in 1598COLL. MSS. T. Hearne, vol. xiii. p. 236. Columbanius says in the Dedication, p. ii. "Qua in re operam mihi suam, non ingratam iliam quidem, navarunt viri omnium literatissimi atque officiosissimi Herricus CUFFUS Anglus, &c.". He was no less eminent as a logician and a disputant. His intimate friend Camden, to whose BRITANNIA, at its first appearance, he prefixed an excellent Greek epigram, characterizes Cuffe, as a man of exquisite learning and genius, but of a factious and perverse temperCamd. ELIZ. p. 869. edit. Hearn.. Notwithstanding the severe check he received at Trinity college, he generously presented to the library there several volumes. Perhaps some readers will be candid enough to think, that his expulsion from this society was rather owing to an unguarded vivacity of disposition, than to any malignity of mind. Our historians say, that the earl of Essex, who began, after a

tedious confinement, to feel the dangers of his situation, dismissed Cuffe from his service and family, for turbulence and insolenceCamden, ubi supr. p. 827. 833.. Essex was unfortunate in not having before perceived these qualities, in a man who shared so much of his confidence.SECT. IX.FROM a recapitulation of what has been said, the following character of sir THOMAS POPE arises. He appears to have been a man eminently qualified for business; and although not employed in the very principal departments of state, he possessed peculiar talents and address for the management and execution of public affairs. His natural abilities were strong, his knowledge of the world deep and extensive, his judgment solid and discerning. His circumspection and prudence in the conduct of negociations entrusted to his charge, were equalled by his fidelity and perseverance. He is a conspicuous instance of one, not bred to the church, who without the advantages of birth and patrimony, by the force of understanding and industry, raised himself to opulence and honorable employments. He lived in an age when the peculiar circumstances of the times afforded obvious temptations to the most abject desertion of principle: and few periods of our history can be found, which exhibit more numerous examples of occasional compliance

with frequent changes. Yet he remained unbiassed and uncorrupted amid the general depravity. Under Henry the eighth, when on the dissolution of the monasteries, he was enabled by the opportunities of his situation to enrich himself with their revenues by fraudulent or oppressive practices, he behaved with disinterested integrity; nor does a single instance occur upon record which impeaches his honor. In the succeeding reign of Edward the sixth, a sudden check was given to his career of popularity and prosperity: he retained his original attachment to the catholic religion; and on that account, lost those marks of favor or distinction which were so liberally dispensed to the sycophants of Somerset, and which he might have easily secured by a temporary submission to the reigning system. At the accession of Mary, he was restored to favor; yet he was never instrumental or active in the tyrannies of that queen which disgrace our annals. He was armed with discretionary powers for the suppression of heretical innovations; yet he forbore to gratify the arbitrary demands of his bigotted mistress to their utmost extent, nor would he participate in forwarding the barbarities of her bloody persecutions. In the guardianship of the princess Elizabeth,

the unhappy victim of united superstition, jealousy, revenge and cruelty, his humanity prevailed over his interest; and he less regarded the displeasure of the vigilant and unforgiving queen, than the claims of injured innocence. If it be his crime to have accumulated riches, let it be remembered, that he consecrated a part of those riches, not amid the terrors of a death-bed, nor in the dreams of old age, but in the prime of life, and the vigour of understanding, to the public service of his country; that he gave them to future generations, for the perpetual support of literature and religion.FINIS.APPENDIX. CONTAINING Original EVIDENCES and PAPERS. NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.CONTENTS OF THE APPENDIX.NUMB. I. THE last will of William Pope of Dedington, father of sir Thomas Pope. Dat. 1523.NUMB. *II*. An Inquisitio post Mortem, &c.NUMB. II. Grant of arms to Thomas Pope of Dedington. Dat. 1535.NUMB. III. Grant to Thomas Pope, from Henry viii. of warden of the mint, &c. in the Tower. Dat. 1535.NUMB. IV. Grant from Henry viii. to Thomas Pope, for exercising, with W. Smyth, the office of clerk of the Crown. Dat. 1536.NUMB. V. Grant to Thomas Pope, and John Lucas, from Henry viii. of clerk of the Crown. Dat. 1538.NUMB. VI. The charter of Mabill, abbess of Godstowe, "made to God and our lady, and to seynt Cuthberte, and to the priour and convente of Dureham, from a certeyne diche thurte over in Bewmonte," circ. 1286.
NUMB. VII. Grant from Henry viii. of Bernard college, with half the grove of Durham college, to the dean and chapter of Christ Church, Oxford. Dat. 1548.NUMB. *VII*. Part of the Charter of foundation of the Dean and Chapter of Durham cathedral, 1541.NUMB. VIII. Grant of Durham college in Oxford, to G. Owen and W. Martyn, from Edward vi. Dat. 1553.NUMB. IX. Purchase of Durham college aforesaid, by sir Thomas Pope, of G. Owen and W. Martyn. Dat. 1554.NUMB. X. Preamble of Letters Patent from Philip and Mary, for founding Trinity college at Oxford. Dat. 1554.NUMB. XI. Part of the charter of establishment of the said college, in consequence of the foregoing letters patent. Dat. 1555.NUMB. XII. Letter of attorney from Thomas Slythurste, for taking possession of a certain messuage in Oxford, called Trinity college. Dat. 1555.NUMB. XIII. Admission of the first president, fellows, and scholars, of the said college, May xxx. 1556.NUMB. XIV. Conditions relating to the foundation of a free grammar-school at Dedington, co. Oxon. by sir Thomas Pope. Dat. 1555.NUMB. XV. Account of a petition referred to the princess Elizabeth at Hatfield, by sir Thomas Pope, 1556.NUMB. XVI. An indenture, made May v. 1555,
"witnessing that the president, fellows, and scholars of Trinity college, Oxford, have received, of their Founder, such parcells of church playte and ornaments of the church as hereafter followethe."NUMB. XVII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus missis per Dominum fundatorem tam ad ornatum sacelli quam aulae. Dat. 1557.NUMB. XVIII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus missis per Dominum fundatorem ad collegium tertia vice. Dat. 1557.NUMB. XIX. Bishop Horne's letter to the said college, concerning the removal of superstitious ornaments from the chapel. Dat. 1570.NUMB. XX. Letter from Q. Elizabeth's commissioners, relating to the business of the last-mentioned letter. Dat. 1570.NUMB. XXI. Compositio collegiorum, coll. Magd. et coll. Trin. Oxon. Dat. 1559.NUMB. XXII. Articles relating to certain buildings and utensils of Wroxton Priory, co. Oxon. Dat. 1537.NUMB. XXIII. Rate of the purchase of the rectory of Garsington, co. Oxon. by sir Thomas Pope, from Philip and Mary, under certain considerations. Dat. 1557. An extract.NUMB. XXIV. An instrument concerning the recession of Trinity college from the university, to Garsington aforesaid, in time of the plague, 1577.NUMB. XXV. Account of the first president, fellows, and scholars of Trinity college, Oxford, NOMINATED by sir Thomas Pope, and admitted May

xxx. 1556. And of such Others as were afterwards NOMINATED by the same authority.NUMB. XXVI. Account of the marriages and descendants of John Pope, esquire, of Wroxton.NUMB. XXVII. Pedigree of the family of POPE.NUMB. XXVIII. Account of sir Thomas Pope's burial, 1559, from a Manuscript in the Cotton library, Brit. Mus.NUMB. XXIX. Visit of the founder to Trinity college, Oxon. 1556.NUMB. XXX. Dr. Ralph Kettel's testimonial of dame Elizabeth Paulet.NUMB. I. The last Will of William Pope of Dedington, father of sir Thomas Pope, Dat. 1523Mus. Ashmol. MSS. D. 15. 4to. pag. 31. b. Inter Codd. A. Wood, Manu. Rad. Sheldon. Et Registr. Bodefelde, Cur. Praerog. qu. vii...IN the name of our Lorde, Amen. The second day of Februarie in the yeare of our lorde one thousand five hundreth and twentie. I WILLIAM POPE, hole of minde, make my will in this maner. First, I bequeathe my soul to allmighty god to his blissed moder Mary: and my bodie to be buried in the parishe chirche of Dadington. To the mother chirche of Lincoln iijs. iiijd. My londe, my wiffe to have the one halffe of the rent, and the rest to bee kept to the use of my sonne till hee bee of lawfull age. Item, I bequeathe to THOMAS POPE an hundreth more; and to everie doughter fourtie pownde: and if enie of them dye, their parte to remaine to other. And to have a preste synginge one yeare. And my wyffe and my sonne to occupie my holdinges, the which I hold now, as longe as she is widowe, and after, THOMAS POPE to have the occupying and thuse of theym. And the

residew of my goodes I gyve and bequeathe to THOMAS POPE my sonne, Margarett my wyffe, Roberte Edmondes, and Richarde Swifte, myne executours, to dispose for the welthe of my sowle; and maister William Farmer to be overseer to the performaunce of my will. Item, I bequeathe to the torchis, the bellis, our ladie beame, saint Thomas beame, to everyche one of theym, iijs. iiijd. Item, to Clifton chapel, vjs. viiijd. Item, to everie godchilde a schepe.Praesentib. temp. lecturae supradicti Testam. Willielmo Farmer, vicario de Dadington. Joanne Smith, et Thoma Anne.Proved before the Commissaries of Cardinal Wolsey, and William Wareham, archbishop of Canterbury, in the cathedral church of saint Paul, London, May 11, 1523.NUMB. *II*. An INQUISITIO POST MORTEM relating to the estate of William Pope, father of sir THOMASEX INQUISIT. POST MORTEM in Anglia, Temp. Hen. viii. MSS. Rawlins. Num. 1386. Bibl. Bodl. fol..POPE. Terrae et possessiones Will. Pope in Com. Oxon. Duo messuagia, sex virgatae terrae, decem acrae prati, viginti acrae pasturae, et tres acrae bosci cum pertin. in Whithill, tent. de dom. rege, ut de hundredo suo de Wotton, pro redditu xijd. per annum, et secta ad curiam hundredi praedicti. Et valent per ann. in omnibus exitibus, ultra reprisas, lxs. Prout per quandam Inquisitionem inde compertam apud Oxon, xvo die Septembr. anno dicti domini regis xvo, coram Roberto Woodcock armigero, escheatore ibidem, (virtute brevis ejusdem regis de diem clausit extremum, eidem escheatori post mortem Willielmi Pope directi: qui obiit xvio die Marcii, anno dicti dom. regis xiiiio: cujus filius et haeres propinquior est Thomas Pope, aetatis xvi annorum et amplius,) plenius continetur. Dicta Messuagia, quatuor virgatae terrae, decem acrae prati, viginti acrae pasturae, et tres acrae bosci, cum pertin. in Hokenorton, tenentur de Carolo duce Suffolciae,

ut de manerio suo de Hokenorton, per quae servicia ignoratur. Et valent in omnibus exitibus ultra reprisas, ut per dictam Inquisitionem, lxs. De quibus quidem praemissis, quidam Rogerus Lupton et alii fuerunt seisiti sicut de feodo, ad usum Willielmi Pope et haeredum, sicut in dicta Inquisitione plenius patetSee supr. p. 5. 265..SUMMA totalis valoris terrarum et possessionum nuper Willielmi Pope in Comitatu praedicto, vi. l.NUMB. II. Grant of Arms to Thomas Pope, esquire, dat. Jun. 26. 1535Ex Orig. penes Honoratiss. Francisc. Com. de Guidford..TO all present and to come, thies present letters receyving or heyring. I Christofore Berker, esquier, alias gartier chief and principall kyng of armes of Englishmen, send due humble recommendation and greeting. Equite willith, and reason ordainith, that men virtuose and of commendable disposicion and lyvyng, be by their merits renoumed and had in perpetuall memory, for their good name and fame. And not all oonly they in their parsons in this mortall lyfe so bryef and transitory; but also, after theym, Those that of their bodies shall come, discende, and procreate, to be in all placys of honnour and worship, with other, renoumed and ennobled by shewing certeyn ensignes and demonstracions of honnour and nobles: That is to witt, the Blason of Armes Helme and Crest, with their appertenaunces: to the intente, that by their ensample other shall the more enforce theym perseverantly to use their tyme in deeds of honnour and worship, and other virtuouse workes, to obteyn and gett the renoume of auncyent noblenesse in their ligne and posterite.

And therefore, I the said gartier principall kyng of armes, which not all-only by comon renoume, but also by the reporte and witness of sundry noble gentilmen of name and of armes, with other credable and noble parsons, am verily informed and advertysed: That THOMAS POPE, of Dodyngton in the countie of Oxenford, esquire, hath long continued in Vertue, so that he hath deserved, and is well worthy, he and his posteritie to be in all places of honnour and worship renoumed, compted, nombred, admitted, accepted and receyved, into the nombre, and of the company, of other auncyent gentilman; And for the remembrance and consideracion of the same his Vertue, Gentilness, and Abilitie; By authorite and power unto myne office annexed and attributed, have devised, ordeyned, and assigned, unto and for the said THOMAS POPE, and his Posteritie, the Armes, Helme, and Creste, in manner and fourme following. THAT IS TO SAY, Party per pale, gold and asure, a chiveron thereon 4 flourdeluces, between 3 griffons heddes rasyd counterchangyd on the fielde. Upon his Crest, 2 dragons heddes indorsant, rasyd, a crownette abowte their necks langued counterchaunged, set on a wreathe gold and vert, the mantlets gueules doubled silver botoned gold, . . . . . . . TO HAVE and to hold, unto the said THOMAS POPE, and to his Posteritie, with their due difference to to be revested to their honour for evermore. In witness whereof, I the said gartier principall king of armes, have signed these presents with myne owne hande, and sett thereto the seall of myne Office, with the seall of myne Armes. GIVEN at London the 26th daye

of June, in the yere of our lorde god 1535, and of reighn of our soveraigne lord king Henry the eighth, by the grace of God king of England and of Fraunce, defensor of the feith, lorde of Irelande, and in earth under Christ the supreme head of the church of England, the 27th yereIn lord Guildford's Pedigree of POPE, which is on parchment beginning with "Thomas Pope Com. Cant. Armiger," before or about the reign of Edward the third, and continued below sir Thomas Pope, a different coat of arms, curiosly depicted, is affixed to each person throughout; without any insertion at the proper place, or continuance afterwards, of the new coat granted in this instrument. However it is evident that the family had no real title to that antient coat, otherwise sir Thomas Pope would never have procured a new grant of arms: and it appears from tombs and painted glass at Wroxton, that the family after him constantly used this new coat granted by Barker, xxvii. Hen. viii.Christopher Barker who grants this patent, was famous in his office. Carte says, that he proclaimed Q. Mary in Cheapside, 1553. But this is a mistake; for he died Jan. 2.—iii Ed. vi. Anstis, ORD. GART. ii. 378. Compare Carte, HIST. iii. 285..NUMB. III. Grant from Henry the eighth to Thomas Pope, gent. of Warden of the Mint, &c. in the Tower, Nov. 13. 1535Sec. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. An. Reg. 26to. Ex Orig. in Capella Rotulorum..Pro Th. Pope, De Concessione.REXomnibus ad quos, etc. SALUTEM.Cum Henricus nuper rex Angliae septimus, pater noster carissimus, de gratia sua speciali, per Literas suas patentes gerentes datum vicesimo quinto die Septembris, anno regni sui primo, dederit et concesserit dilecto sibi Willielmo StaffordIn the British Museum may be seen, "Particule Compoti Willelmi Stafford Armigeri, Custodis Cambii et Monete infra Turrim London. viz. de Auro et Argento ibidem operatis, fabricatis, et monetatis, a festo S. Michaelis Archangeli, Anno 14 RR. Henrici vii. usque festum S. Michaelis Archangeli, Anno 16to." MSS. Harl. 698. 29. p. 76. See also.—30. pag. 62. tam officium Custodis Cambii et Monete infra Turrim suam London, quam Custodiam Cunagiorum auri et argenti infra Turrim predictam et alibi infra regnum

suum Anglie; habend. et occupand. Officium et Custodiam illam per se vel per suum sufficientem deputatum, aut suos sufficientes deputatos, a vicesimo secundo die Augusti tunc ultimo preterito, ad terminum vite ipsius Willielmi; percipiendo in et pro dictis Officio et Custodia vadia, ultimo Edwardi tercii, et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Anglie, annis, eisdem Officio et Custodie debita et consueta, de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete, et Cunagiorum, predictorum, provenientia, per manus suas proprias, una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis, regardis, commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus, jurisdictionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis, eisdem Officio et Custodie, seu eorum alteri, qualitercunque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma prout aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium et Custodiam praedicta, tempore prefati dni Edwardi tercii, aut aliquo alio tempore, melius tenuit et occupavit, tenuerunt et occupaverunt, ac in eisdem percepit et perceperunt, prout in eisdem literis patentibus plenius apparet. CUMQUE eciam Nos, per alias literas nostras patentes gerentes datum duodecimo die Augusti, anno regni nostri septimo, de gracia nostra speciali, dederimus et concesserimus dilecto Servienti nostro Johanni CopyngerBut I find an absolute grant of this office made to him three years before, Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 4. April. vi. I find also the following grants made to the said John Copynger within the fifteen first years of Henry viii. viz.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 1 April. x. He, with James Worsley, has from the king, certain tenements within the parish of saint Austin, in London, ad placitum.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 3. Novemb. xiii. He has the office Ballivi Dominii de Grays-thurk, co. Essex, ad vitam.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 6. Octobr. xix. He has the office Clerici Exituum Curiae de Banco, cum vadio, xl.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 6. Novemb. xxvii. He has the office Custodis Parci de Ockley co. Gloucestr.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 8. Maii. xx. He has the office of keeper of the king's wardrobe within the castle of Nottingham, ad vitam. He being then "Pagetius Garderobe nostre."—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 8. Febr. xii. He being de Hospitio nostro, has a special pardon.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 9. Octobr. xvii. He has a special pardon.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 10. Jul. xvi. He has the office of keeper of the king's wood de Chestenwoode co. Cant. cum. vadio ii d. per diem ad vitam.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 15. Decembr. 12. The king grants to John Copynger Grometto robarum suarum, custodiam placeae vocat. Bridewell cum Pertin. juxta Civit. London. cum vad. iv d. per diem ad vitam, from the revenues of the duchy of Cornwall.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 7. Febr. viii. Thomas Ryder, and John Copynger, have grant of a corrody within the monastery of Milton in Dorsetshire.What was the stipend of the Gardianus Monetae in Turri, does not appear. But John Browne has an annuity of xviijl. vjs. viijd. in consideration of resigning this office. Priv. Sigill. xxiv. Maii, an. 36. Hen. vii. generoso, ac pagetto officii nostre garderobe robarum,

tam Officium predictum Custodie Cambii et Monete infra turrim nostram London, quam Custodiam cunagiorum auri et argenti infra Turrim predictam et alibi infra regnum nostrum Anglie predictum, habend et occupand. Officium et Custodiam illam, per se vel per suum sufficientem deputatum, aut per suos sufficientes deputatos, quandocumque primo et proxime idem officium, seu custodia, per mortem predicti Willielmi, aut per sursum reddicionem

predictarum literarum patencium, seu quocumque alio modo, vacare contigisset, pro termino vite ipsius Johannis; percipiendo annuatim, in et pro dictis Officio et Custodia, vadia, ultimo Edwardi tercii, et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Angliae, annis, eisdem Officio et Custodie debita et consueta, de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete ac cunagii predictorum provenientia, per manus suas proprias, una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis, regardis, commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus, jurisdictionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis eidem Officio et Custodie, et eorum alteri, qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma prout aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium et Custodium predicta, tempore prefati dni Edwardi tercii, aut aliquo alio tempore, melius tenuerit et occupaverit, tenuerint et occupaverint, ae in eisdem percepit et perceperint, prout in eisdem literis nostris patentibus plenius apparet. AC JAM intelleximus, quod prefatus Gulielmus Stafford mortuus est; cujus pretextu prefatus Johannes Copynger officium predictum, virtute literarum nostrarum predictarum, adhuc exercuit et occupavit, et ad presens exercet et occupat: Ac modo prefatus Johannes Copynger in voluntate existit literas predictas, sibi in forma predicta factas, nobis restituere in cancellariam nostram, ibidem cancellandas; ea intencione quod nos alias literas nostras patentes de officio predicto ac ceteris premissis, Dilecto nobis THOME POPE, Generoso, pro termino vite ipsius THOME, concedere dignaremur. Nos premissa considerantes, pro eo quod litere patentes, dicto Johanni, ut premittitur,

facte, ad presens cancellate existunt, de gracia nostra speciali, necnon in consideracione veri et fidelis servicii, nobis per predictum THOMAM antehac impensi, et imposterum impendendi, dedimus et concessimus, ac per presentes damus et concedimus, eidem THOME, tam predictum officium Custodie Cambii et Monete infra Turrim nostram London, quam predictam Custodiam Cunagiorum auri et argenti infra Turrim predictam, et alibi infra regnum nostrum Anglie: Habend. et occupand. Officium et Custodiam illam per se, vel per sufficientem deputatum suum aut per suos deputatos sufficientes, a festo sancti Michaelis ultimo preterito ad terminum vite ipsius THOME: Percipiendo, in et pro dicto Officio et Custodia, vadia ultimo Edwardi tercii et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Anglie, annis, eisdem Officio et Custodie debita et consueta de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete, ac Cunagiorum predictorum, provenientia, per manus suas proprias, una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis, regardis, commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus, jurisdictionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis, eisdem Officio et Custodie, seu earum alteri, qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma prout aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium et Custodiam predicta, tempore prefati Edwardi tercii, aut aliquo alio tempore, melius tenuit et occupavit, tenuerunt et occupaverunt, ac in eisdem percepit et perceperunt. Eo quod expressa

mencio, etc. IN CUJUS, etc. T. R. apud Westmon. xiii. die Novembr.P. ipsum Regem et de dat. predict. etc.Concordat cum Orig. in Capella Rotul.HEN. ROOKE, Cler. Rotul. (1764.)NUMB. IV. Grant from Henry the eighth to Thomas Pope and William SmythAnother patent is herein recited, by which the said king granted to THOMAS POPE the office of clerk of the briefs in the star-chamber. an. reg. 24. Octobr. v. viz. A.D. 1533., for their joint exercise of the office of Clerk of the briefs in the star-chamber. Decemb. 23. 1536Prim. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. Anno Reg. 26. Ex Orig. in Capell. Rot..De Concess. pro Thoma Pope, et Will. Smyth.REXomnibus ad quos, etc. salutem.CUM nos per literas nostras patentes, quarum dat. est quinto die Octobris, anno regni nostri vicesimo quarto, inter alia fecerimus, constituerimus, et ordinaverimus, dilectum nobis THOMAM POPE, clericum omnium singulorum brevium et processuum nostrorum, coram nobis et concilio nostro in camera nostra Stellata apud Westmonasterium, tam ad sectam nostram, quam ad sectam alicujus ligeorum nostrorum, et aliorum quorumcunque, faciendorum et retornandorum; viz. quod idem THOMAS extunc de tempore in tempus, durante vita sua, per se vel per

sufficientem deputatum suum sive sufficientes deputatos suos, omnia et singula brevia de subpena, attachiamenta, commissiones, tam ad examinandos testes, quam ad recipiendas responsiones; nec non ad quascumque materias finaliter determinandas, quam alias commissiones quascumque, injunctiones, brevia de executione judicii, et alios processus quoscumque, cujuscumque nominis generis seu nature forent, coram nobis et consilio nostro apud Westmon. retornatos, seu quoquo modo ibidem per decretum consilii nostri predicti qualitercunque emanantes, seu per dicti consilii nostri decretum ibidem faciendos, Scriberet, faceret, et componeret, et cujuslibet [cuilibet] hujusmodi brevium et processuum nomen suum apponeret seu apponi faceret; ita quod nullus clericus cancellarie nostre predicte, neque aliquis alius in scribendo seu faciendo hujusmodi brevia seu processus, seu aliqua eorumdem, quoquomodo se intromitteret, seu intromitterent, sine licentia ipsius THOME POPE. Habend. occupand. gaudend. et exercend. officium predictum prefato THOME POPE, per se, vel sufficientem deputatum suum, sive deputatos suos sufficientes, durante vita sua, cum vadiis et feodisEdmund Martyn and Thomas Powle were appointed to this office, with an annual fee of xx l. Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 38., pro hujusmodi brevibus et processibus faciendis, ab antiquo debitis et consuetis absque aliquo compoto, seu aliquo alio, proinde nobis vel heredibus nostris reddendo, solvendo, seu faciendo, prout in eisdem literis nostris predictis inter alia plenius

continetur. ET QUIA prefatus THOMAS in voluntate existit, literas nostras predictas, sibi in forma predicta factas, quoad dictum Officium clerici omnium et singulorum brevium et processuum nostrorum, coram nobis et consilio nostro in camera nostra Stellata apud Westmon. faciendorum et retornandorum, nobis in cancellariam nostram restituere ibidem cancellandas; ea intencione, quod nos alias literas nostras patentes prefato THOME POPE, ac cuidam Willielmo Smyth, de dicto Officio clerici processuum nostrorum predictorum in forma sequenti concedere dignaremur: Nos, pro eo quod litere nostre predicte quoad dictum Officium clerici processuum nostrorum predict. prefato THOME POPE facte, ad presens cancellate existunt, de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa sciencia et mero motu nostris, fecimus, constituimus, ordinavimus ipsos THOMAM POPE et Willielmum Smyth et eorum alterum diutius viventem, clericos omnium et singulorum brevium et processuum nostrorum coram nobis et concilio nostro in Camera nostra Stellata apud Westmon. tam ad sectam nostram quam sectam alicujus ligeorum nostrorum et aliorum quorumcunque faciendorum et retornandorum: viz. quod idem THOMAS POPE et Williemus Smyth, et eorum diutius vivens, ex nunc de tempore in tempus durante vita sua per se vel per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive sufficientes deputatos suos, omnia et singula, brevia de subpena, attachiamenta, commissiones, tam ad examinandos testes ad recipiend. responsiones, necnon ad quascunque materias finaliter determinandas, quam alias commissiones quascunque cujuscumque nominis, generis, seu

nature, fuerint, coram nobis et consilio nostro apud Westmon. retornat. seu quoquomodo ibidem per decretum consilii nostri predicti faciend. vel e dicto consilio nostro extra predictam cameram Stellatam per decretum consilii nostri predicti qualitercumque emanantes, seu per dicti consilii nostri decretum ibidem faciendas, scribant, faciant, et componant, et cujuslibet [cuilibet] hujusmodi brevium, et processuum nomina sua propria, vel nomen eorum alterius apponant seu apponat, vel faciat; ita quod nullus clericus cancellarie nostre predicte, neque aliquis alius in scribendo seu faciendo hujusmodi brevia vel processus, seu aliqua eorundem, quoquomodo etc. intromittant vel intromittat, sine licencia ipsorum THOME POPE et Willielmi Smyth. Habend. occupand. gaudend. et exercend. officium predictum prefatis THOME POPE et Willielmo Smyth, et eorum alteri diutius viventi, per se vel per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive deputatos suos sufficientes, durante vita ipsorum THOME POPE et Willielmi Smyth, et eorum diutius viventis, cum vadiis et feodis pro hujusmodi brevibus et processibus faciendis ab antiquo debitis et consuetis, absque aliquo compoto seu aliquo alio, proinde nobis vel heredibus nostris reddendo solvendo seu faciendo. Et ulterius de uberiori gracia nostra, dedimus et licentiam concessimus prefato Willielmo Smyth, quod ipse omnia et singula brevia, processus, necnon literas nostras patentes quoscunque, ac alios processus quoscunque cujuscumque nominis generis seu nature fuerint in eadem curia cancellarie nostre faciendos, ex nunc durante vita sua predicta, nomine suo proprio, vel nomine magistri

rotulorum, aut nomine alicujus magistri de curia cancellarie nostre predicte pro tempore existentis, ad libitum suum seribere, facere, et componere possit et valeat licite et impune, absque molestatione, contradictione, seu impedimento, magistri rotulorum cancellarie nostre pro tempore existentis, seu alicujus alterius persone, sive aliquarum aliarum personarum quarumcunque, in curia cancellarie nostre predicte nunc existentis, aut in posterum fiendi; processibus officii clerici corone ejusdem cancellarie nostre, sex clericorum cancellarie nostre predicte ac clericorum de parva baga ejusdem cancellarie nostre quoquomodo pertinentibus sive spectantibus duntaxat exceptis. Et hoc absque fine seu feodo magno et parvo in hanaperio cancellarie nostre predicte proinde reddendo, solvendo, seu faciendo. Et quod expressa mencio de vero valore annuo, aut de certitudine premissorum, seu eorum alîcujus, aut de aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos prefatis THOME POPE et Willielmo Smyth ante haec tempora factis in presentibus minime facta existit, aliquo statuto actu ordinacione provisione seu restrictione inde in contrarium habito, facto, ordinato, sive proviso: aut aliqua alia re causa vel materia quacumque in aliqua re non obstante. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westmon. vicesimo tercio die Decembr.Per ipsum regem, et data predicta auctoritate parliamenti.Concordat cum Orig. in Capell. Rot.HEN. ROOKE. (1764.)NUMB. V. Grant from Henry the eighth to Thomas Pope and John Lucas, of Clerk of the Crown in ChancerySpecifying a former grant of the same made to Thomas Pope alone, Octob. xv. 1533. an. reg. 24., February xxviii. 1538Quint. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. An. Reg. 29o. Ex Orig. in Capel. Rotul..Pro Thoma Pope, et Joh. Lucas, de Concessione ad Vitam.REXomnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem.CUM NOS decimo quinto die Octobris, anno regni nostri vicesimo quarto per literas nostras patentes, recitantes in eisdem, quod nos per alias literas patentes, quarum quedam date fuerunt sexto die Marcii, anno regni nostri tercio decimo de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa sciencia et mero motu nostris, dederimus et concesserimus dilecto nobis Radulpho PexallBill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 6. Decembr. xvi. and an. reg. 4. The said Rad. Pexall, and Edith his wife, have specialem liberationem.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 11. April. xvi. The king appoints the said Ralph Feodarium suum co. Suthamton.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 15. Septembr. xvi. He has a grant of a corrody within the monastery of Thetford.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 16. Mar. vi. He is made Clerk of the Crown.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 19. [Sine D. Mens.] He has licence "quod ipse pannos laneos latos, ac pannos laneos vocat. Kerseys, ac quoscunque pannos, plumbum, etc. unde custume et subsidia ad summam ccccl. attingent, solvendo custumas ad finem an. quinque post estimacionem, etc. possit emere, etc." I find a grant of the priory of Bradenstocke to one Richard Pexall. Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 38. Octobr. viii. Officium Clerici Corone

Cancellarie Anglie: habend. occupand. et exercend. Officium illud eidem Radulpho ad terminum vite sue, per se, vel per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive per sufficientes deputatos suos, cum omnibus juribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et emolumentis, eidem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma prout Johannes Tanworth, Galsridus Marten, et Thomas Ive, temporibus Edwardi quarti, nuper regum Anglie, ac Willielmus Porter nuper Officium illud habens tempore nostro, separatim tenuerint, occupaverint, et exercuerint: ac eciam viginti libras annuas prefato Radulpho, pro occupatione et exercicio Officii predicti, dederimus et concesserimus, per predictas literas nostras patentes, habend. et singulis annis percipiend. prefato Radulpho, durante vita sua, de exitibus, proficuis, et revencionibus Hanaperii Cancellarie nostre predicte, per manus custodis ejusdem Hanaperii pro tempore existentis, prout dicti Johannes Tanworth, Galfridus Marten, et Thomas Ive, temporibus predictis, ac Clemens Clerke tempore bone memorie dni Henrici regis patris nostri, ac dictus Willielmus Porter tempore

nostro, in Officio predicto, separatim tenuerunt, et perceperunt: necnon Liberatam Vesturam et FurruramIn the regin of Edward the fourth, the expenee of furring the liveries or robes of the fellows of New college, Oxford, for one year, is very considerable. Rot. Comp. COLL. NOV. Oxon. A.D. 1479. "SOLUTIO PRO FURRURA. Et Sol. pro lv sociis pro Furrura hoc anno, xviijl. vjs. viijd." The following notices also shew the very general and early use of this article of dress, with its prices. COMP. Coll. Winton. A.D. 1399. "CUSTUS CONSANGUINEORUM DOMINI.—In stipendio j pelliparii furrantis ij togas de albo russetto [for two scholars] erga festum Omnium Sanctorum viijd. In ij novis furruris emptis pro eisdem simul cum stipendio pelliparii furrantis ij togas de Liberata [Livery] DOMINI Episcopi [fundatoris] erga festum Natalis Domini iijs. xd." COMP. Coll. Winton. A.D. 1396. "LIBERATA. Et in xxj furruris albis emptis pro LIBERATA Capellanorum [the fellows] VALECTORUM et BALLIVORUM erga festum Natalis Domini xxxjs. vjd."—COMP. ibid. A.D. 1394.—"LIBERATA. Et in iiij furruris emptis pro LIBERATA Willielmi Pope [steward] et iij serviencium Collegii (pret. furrure xviijd.) vjs."—Milton, in COMUS, uses the word fur for robe in general, in consequence of its constantly making a part of the scholastic habit. ver. 707.—Doctors of the stoick Furr.The poet means, those morose and unfeeling teachers, who wear the gown which distinguishes the sect of the stoic philosophers., prout Ricardus Sturgyon et Thomas Ive, tempore bone memorie dni Henrici sexti nuper regis Anglie progenitoris nostri, et dictus Willielmus Porter tempore nostro, tenuerunt et perceperunt, habend. et percipiend. annuatim prefato Radulpho, pro termino vite sue, ad magnam Garderobam nostram, per manus custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre pro tempore existentis, erga festa Natalis Domini et

Pentecostis, prout in literis illis plenius continebatur: GRANDES labores, laudabiliaque obsequia, quae dilectus nobis THOMAS POPE, attendens negociis nostris in Cancellaria nostra predicta multipliciter impendebat, indiesque impendere intendebat, merito contemplantes; de gracia nostra speciali, ac ex certa sciencia, et mero motu nostris, dederimus et concesserimus prefato THOME POPE, inter alia, predictum Officium Clerici Corone Cancellarie Anglie, habend. occupand. et exercend. Officium illud eidem THOME POPE, ad terminum vite sue, per se, vel per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive sufficientes deputatos suos, cum omnibus juribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et emolumentis, eidem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus sive spectantibus, immediate post mortem, dimissionem, sursum reddicionem, seu forisfacturam ipsius Radulphi, vel quam cito Officium illud ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo devenire contigisset, ac eciam viginti libras annuas prefato THOME POPE, pro occupacione et exercicio Officii predicti, dederimus et concesserimus, per easdem literas nostras patentes, habend. et singulis annis percipiend. prefato THOME POPE, durante vita sua, immediate post mortem, dimissionem, sursum reddicionem, seu sorisfacturam, ipsius Radulphi, vel quam cito Officium illud ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo devenire contigisset, de exitibus, proficuis, et revencionibus, Hanaperii Cancellarie nostre predicte, per manus custodis ejusdem Hanaperii pro tempore existentis, necnon Liberatam Vesturam et Furruram, habend. et annuatim percipiend. prefato THOME POPE, pro termino vite sue, ad magnam

Garderobam nostram, per manus custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre pro tempore existentis, erga festa Natalis Domini et Pentecostis, immediate post mortem, dimissionem, sursum reddicionem, seu forisfacturam ipsius Radulphi, aut quam cito Officium illud ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo devenire contigisset, in tam amplis modo et forma prout predictus Radulphus Officium predictum tunc habens, seu aliquis alius, sive aliqui alii, Officium predictum ante ea tempore habens, seu habentes, habuisset seu percepisset, vel percepissent, in et pro exercicio ejusdem, prout in literis nostris patentibus predictis, datis decimo quinto die Octobris anno regni nostri vicesimo quarto supradicto, plenius continetur. Ac postmodum dictus Radulphus diem suum clausit extremum; quo pretextu, Officium illud ad prefatum THOMAM POPE, virtute literarum nostrarum patencium predictarum, devenit; ipseque in Officium predictum, post mortem predicti Radulphi intravit, illudque exercuit et occupavit, et adhuc occupat, juxta tenorem literarum nostrarum predictarum: Quas quidem literas nostras patentes, eidem THOME POPE de Officio predicto factas, prefatus THOMAS POPE in voluntate existit nobis in Cancellariam nostram, quoad Officium predictum necnon omnia et singula premissa idem Officium concernentia, restituere, ibidem cancellandas; ea intencione, quod nos alias literas nostras patentes de Officio illo eidem THOME POPE et cuidam Johanni Lucas concedere dignaremur. Nos premissa considerantes, ac pro eo quod litere patentes predicte, prefato THOME POPE in forma predicta facte, ad

presens cancellate existunt, de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris, dedimus et concessimus, ac per presentes damus et concedimus, prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas dictum Officium Clerici Corone Anglie; ipsosque, et eorum Utrumque, Clericos Corone Cancellarie Anglie facimus, constituimus, et ordinamus, per presentes: Habend. occupand. et exercend. Officium illud eisdem THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, ad terminum vite ipsorum THOME POPE et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius diutius viventis, per se, vel per eorum alterum, aut per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive deputatos suos sufficientes, cum omnibus juribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et emolumentis, eidem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus five spectantibus: Ac eciam viginti libras annuas prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, pro occupacione et exercicio Officii predicti damus et concedimus per presentes: Habend. et singulis annis percipiend. prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, durante vita ipsorum THOME POPE et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius diutius viventis, de exitibus, proficuis, et revencionibus, Hanaperii, pro tempore existentis: Necnon liberatam vesturam et Furruram, habend. et annuatim percipiend. prefatis THOME POPE et Johanni Lucas, pro termino vite ipsorum THOME POPE et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius diutius viventis, ad magnam Garderobam nostram, per manus custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre pro tempore existentis, erga festa Natalis Domini et Pentecostis, in tam amplis modo et forma prout predictus Radulphus, seu aliquis alius, sive aliqui

alii, Officium predictum ante haec tempore habens, seu habentes, tenuerit sive perceperit, tenuerunt vel perceperunt, in et pro exercicio Officii predicti: Et hoc absque fine seu foedo, magno vel parvo, in Hanaperio Cancellarie nostre, seu alibi, ad opus nostrum proinde reddendo, solvendo, aut faciendo. Eo quod expressa mencio, etc. IN CUJUS, etc. T. R. apud Westmon. xxviii. die Februarii.Per ipsum Regem, etc.Concordat cum Orig. in Capella Rotul.HEN. ROOKE, Cler. Rotul. (1764.)NUMB. VI. The Charter of Mabill Abbesse of GodstoweHer name was Mabile Wafre. She was the eighth abbess, and presided about the year 1286. Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. 178., made to God and oure lady and to seynt Cuthberte, and to the Priour and Convent of Dureham, from a certeyne diche thurte over in BewmounteFrom the Chartulary of the Nunnery of Godstow. MSS. Rawlins. 1300. fol. Bibl. Bodl.Viz. All the charters and evidences of the said nunnery, from the foundation, abstracted into English, by "a pore broder and welwysher to the good Abbes of Godestowe, dame Alice Henly, and to all hyr covent." Alice Henly, or Alice of Henly, was abbess about 1464. Temp. Edw. iv. In the prologue or preface, (fol. 1.) the writer says, that he translates their register, or ledger book, into English, for the benefit of religious women, who are not supposed to understand Latin. It is the original, on vellum.—Tanner, (NOT. MON. fol. p. 423.) informs us, that this curious manuscript formerly belonged to sir James Ware, and afterwards to Henry earl of Clarendon. The nuns are here often called Mynchons. So the nunnery at Littlemore near Oxford, is called the Minchery, that is, the MINCHIONRY, or house of nuns. Hearne gives another interpretation of Minchery. HIST. ANTIQ. GLASTONB. Pref. p. xxi. edit. 1722. It was customary for the bishops in their visitations of the religious houses, to deliver their Injunctions, not only to the monks, but even to the female convents, drawn up in the Latin language; which the nuns understood just as well as their Latin leases, and had therefore a fair excuse for not observing. Sometimes, however, but very early, they were given to the nunneries in French..THE sentence of this charter is, that Mabile Abbesse of Godstowe, and the convent of the same place, with one assent and consent, yave, etc.

to god, and to oure lady seynt Maria, and to seynt Cuthberte, and to the priour and convent of Dureham, and to ther successoures, or their assignes, all what so ever they were, all ther arable londs, the which they had fro a diche thurte over in BewmonteSome antiquaries suppose that Oxford was a Roman City, called BELLOSITUM: an hypothesis almost as chimerical as the fable of Brutus being the founder of the university. The truth is, King Henry the first gave his palace at Oxford, the Norman or French appellation BEAUMONT. This was soon latinised into BELLOSITUM: which at length became a name for the town in general. Others pretend, that the original antient university which flourished before king Alfred's time, was styled BELLOSITUM, and that it stood detached from the present, in or about Saint Giles's field. This is another fiction of the monks, which originated after the eleventh century., that is to say, fro the londe of Philipp Ho Burgeys of Oxenforde, unto the londe that was of Roger Semer, in the same tiltheTillage. A field., in the subarbis of Oxenforde; whereof thre acres lye beside the londe of Walter Bost of the north parte, and one acre lieth of the southe parte of the londe of the said Walter Bost, bitwene the londe of Thomas Lewes and the

londe of the same Roger Semer: and one hede of all the said londe buttith to the wallesOf the city. towarde the west, and another hede buttith unto the kyngis hye waye of Bewmonte, toward the est. Also with vi penyworth of yerely rente to be taken of one acre of the londe of Thomas Lewes, with the tythes of the same acre, and the tythes of an acre of Walter Boste in the same tylthe; with all his pertynantis, longyngBelonging. bothe to the londe, and to the rent and tythes. They willed also and graunted to the same priour and covent aforesaid, that they shold have whatsoever right they had in voide groundes besideAula Periculosa.Peralowse Hall in Horsemonger streteWhere a large stone-edifice now stands called Kettel-Hall; built by Dr. Ralph Kettel, president of Trinity college, about 1615. For building this Kettel-hall, a house was pulled down inhabited by George Cawfield, recorder of Oxford, who was buried in saint Mary Magdalene's church, xx. Octob 1603. MSS. Wood, Mus. Ashm. Collectan. e Registr. Parochial. Civitat. Oxon. D. 5. 4to. During Cromwell's usurpation, such of the academics as had been famous for acting plays in the late king's time, used to act plays by stealth in this Hall. Wood's LIFE, vol. 2. p. 148. edit. 1772.. To be had and to be hold to the priour and convent of Dureham, and to ther successoures or ther assigns, All of Them, and ther church of Godstowe, frely, quyetly, holy, wele, and in pease, for ever; with all liberties, eschetes, customes, tithes, eysementisEasments., with entryngis

and goyng owte, and sutes of courte; and all other thynges and actions in only wise longyng to the said londe, rente and tythes, with all ther pertynantis. Yelding thereof yerely to them, and to ther successoures, or to their assignes whosoever the be, xs. of silver, and at michelmasse vs. of silver, for all servyce, customs, exactions, sutis of courtes, and secular demaundes. And yf hit happen the said priour and convent, and ther successoures, or ony maner assignes of them, to be behynde, of [or] to faile in the payment of the said yerely rente, (that god forbede;) the foresaide priour and convente grauntith for them and their successoures, and all maner of assignes, that hit sholde be wele lawfull to the foresaid abbesse and convente of Godstowe and to ther successoures, or mynystris or servauntis, who soever the be, to entre, destrayne, and nymeTo take for a pledge. To seize. See Dufresue, LAT. GL. V. Namium, Namiare, &c. And Lye's Sax. Goth. Dictionary, V. Niman., all tenements that they had, or myght have, in the subarbis of Oxenforde towarde the northe fro the the fornamed diche thurte over Bewmounte, unto Horsemonger strete also; and all the londes aforesaid, from day unto day, for the foresaid yearely xs. without ony agayn sayingeGainsaying. or lette of the foresayde priour, covente, successours, or assignes, whosoever they be, tille hit were fully satisfyed to the sayde abbesse and covente of Godestowe, and to ther successoures and assignes, all of the forsaide rente. And the foresaid

abbesse and covente of Godestowe, and ther successoures, warrantized, aquyted, and defended for the forsaide rente of xs. all the foresaide londes, sixe penyworthe of yerely rent, and tythes of ii acres of Walter Bost, and Thomas Lewes, with all ther pertynantis as hit is said afore, to the foresaide priour and covente of Durham, and to ther successoures, and to ther assignes, ayenst all men and women. Furthermore, the said abbesse and covente of Godestowe willed and graunted for them and ther successoures, or assignes, whych soever they sholde be, that they sholde be quyte from yevyng all tythes, bothe of more and lesseGreat and Small Tythes., in the forsaid covente for ever. And for this gyfte, etc. the foresaid prior and covente yaf to them aforehandes xx marke of sterlyngis. In witness of all those thyngis, &c.The original is in Thesauriar. coll. Div. Joh. Bapt. Oxon. among other instruments of Godstowe nunnery. In an abstract from which, Wood gives the names of the witnesses, viz. "Phil. de Ho, tunc Majori Oxon. Henr. Howayne, Johan. de Ho, Will. le Specer, Tho. Sowey." Mus. Ashm. 8513.—Philip de Ho, O, or Eu, occurs mayor of Oxon, 1276, 1286, 1295, 1296, 1299. A. Wood's Cat. of Mayors, etc. of Oxford, pag. 66. seq. MSS. ut supr. D. 7.About the same time, two plots of ground lying in Magdalene parish, were confirmed to them by the convent of saint Frideswide's. [See Br. Twyne, MSS. 8. p. 259.] And in 1291, their precincts and possessions were enlarged by grants of more ground lying in and about their house. Wood's CITY of Oxford, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. All this they enjoyed till their dissolution.NUMB. VII. Grant from Henry the eighth of Barnard College, with half the Grove of Durham College, to the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford, Decemb. 11. 1548In Capell. Rot..REX, etc. Salutem, sciatis quod nos, de gracia nostra speciali, ac ex certa sciencia et mero motu nostris, Dedimus et concessimus, ac per praesentes damus et concessimus, decano et capitulo ecclesie cathedralis Christi Oxon, ex fundatione nostra, inter multa alia Totum illum scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum, et precinctum, totius illius collegii, vulgaritur nuncupati BARNARDES COLLEDGEBernard college, (now saint John's) was inhabited by students, under that name, in the year 1549; and, as I conjecture, two or three years afterwards. I find a Manciple of Bernard college suing for battels in the vice-chancellor's court, 1549. Registr. cur. cancell. Oxon. G G. fol. 37. Its last prefect, called Provisor, before its endowment by sir Thomas Whyte, was Dr. Kennall. It had been an academical convent of Bernardines, built by archbishop Chichely. Pat. ann. 15. Henr. vi. membr. 24. [A.D. 1437.] The king sets forth, that whereas Henry [Chicheley] archbishop of Canterbury intends to found "quoddam congruum et notabile mansum collegiale, in honorem gloriosissimae virginis Mariae sanctique Bernardi, in vico vulgariter nuncupato Northgates strete, vel saltem prope dictum vicum, in parochia sanctae Mariae Magdalenae, juxta et extra portam borealem villae Oxon, in solo ipsius archiepiscopi continente quinque acras terrae vel circiter, quae de nobis tenentur in capite, &c." In a roll, in the Court of augmentations, the site and garden of Bernard college containing two acres, with all its edifices, and the garden of Durham college, is valued at xxs. per ann. Pyx. S. FRIDESWYDE. OXON. in civitate nostra Oxon, cum suis juribus

membris, et pertinenciis universis; Ac omnia et singula domos, edificia, structuras, ortos, pomeria, gardina, stagna, vivaria, terras, et solum nostra, infra dictum scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum, seu precinctum, dicti collegii vocati BARNARDES COLLEGE, existentia; ac omnia et singula, muros, menia, fossata, parietes, et cetera inclosamenta quecunque, eundem scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum seu precinctum, ambientia aut quocunque modo includentia: Ac eciam Dimidium, sive Medietatem, totius illius Horti collegii vocati Durham Colledge in parochia sancte Marie Magdalene in suburbiis dicte civitatis Oxon, collegio vocato Durham Colledge dudum spectantis et pertinentis: Habend. tenend. et gaudend. predictum scitum, et cetera Premissa predicta, eisdem Decano et capitulo, et successoribus suis imperpetuum. Teste R. apud Westmon. xi. die Decembris, anno R. Hen. octavi xxxviii.NUMB. *VII*. Part of the Charter of foundation of the Dean and Chapter of Durham cathedral, given by King Henry the eighth, A.D. 1541In Archivis Eccl. Cathedr. Dunelm. MS. Et in Capell. Rotul. viz. Lit. Pat. Henr. viii. ann. reg. 33.."DAMUS etiam, ac per praesentes concedimus, praefato Decano et Capitulo, totum illud scitum, circuitum, ambitum, et praecinctum, cujusdam nuper Collegii vocati Duresme College infra villam Oxon, in com. nostro Oxon. Ac totam illam ecclesiam sive capellam, campanile, coemeterium, ejusdem nuper collegii, una cum omnibus domibus, aedificiis, pomariis, gardinis, hortis, et solo, tam intra quam extra, juxta et prope scitum, ambitum, et praecinctum ejusdem nuper collegii. Ac totum illud tenementum in HAMBOROWE in dicto com. nostro Oxon Ac totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostram de FRAMPTON in com nostro Lincoln. Ac totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostram de RODINGTON in com. nostro Nottingham. Ac omnes illas rectorias et ecclesias nostras de FISHLAKE, BOSSAL,

et BRANTINGHAM, in com. nostro Ebor. Ac quandam annuitatem five annualem redditum quatuor librarum exeuntium et annuatim percipiendarum de rectoria five ecclesia nostra de NORTH ALLERTON in dicto com. nostro Ebor, ad festa Annunciationis beatae MARIAE VIRGINIS et sancti MICHAELIS ARCHANGELI, annuatim solvendum. Ac totam illam pensionem, five annuum redditum, sedecim librarum exeuntium et annuatim percipiendarum de VICARIO de NORTH ALLERTON praedicti pro tempore existente. Quae quidem rectoriae, annuitates, et pensiones praedictae dicti nuper Collegii, praedicto nuper MONASTERIO sancti Cuthberti Dunelmensis praedicti spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellae et possessiones ejusdem nuper COLLEGII et dicti nuper MONASTERII extiteruntDurham College, after its dissolution, was inhabited for some time by Walter Wryght archdeacon of Oxford, who presided in it over a few students. But before or about the year 1552, it was totally desolated, and the buildings being intirely neglected, began to be ruinous. Wood, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. 3. pag. 208. See also Registr. CUR. CANCELL. Oxon. G G. sol. 55. 68. 76. And Stevens, MONAST. i. 343. Also, APPEND. Numb. viii. Wood tells us, that before the reign of Edward the sixth, "Collegium vero Dunelmense et Bernardinum [now saint John's college] vacua paene jacebant . . . . unde canilia lustra, joco populari, vocabantur: usquedum THOMAE POPE et THOMAE WHYTE militum, pietate, latisundiis esient locupletata." HIST. ANTIQ. Univ. Oxon. i. 281. col. 1. [From Br. Twyne, MSS. ARCHIV. Oxon. 8. fol. 235. 4to.] And Camden BRITANN. p. 271. DOBUN. edit. 1607. fol. viz. "Nostra itidem memoria, ut novis etiam beneficiis Musas complecterentur, Thomas Pope vir ordinis equestris Dunelmense collegium, et Thomas White civis senatorque Londinensis, et equestris itidem ordinis, Bernardi collegium, quae suis ruderibus sepulta jacuerunt, excitarunt, novis aedificiis instaurarunt, latifundiis locupletarunt, et novis nominibus exornarunt. Hoc enim S. Joanni Baptistae, illud Sacrosanctae Trinitati dicarunt." Doctor T. Cay thus speaks of Durham college, in a passage which for the elegance of its latinity alone deserves to be transcribed. "Fuit aula illa de qua mentio est apud eundem Aungervillium, aula Dunelmensis, intra paucos annos Collegium Dunelmense, et hodie Collegium Trinitatis, vocata. Hanc bonus ille episcopus primus erexit, constructa inibi bibliotheca optimis libris referta, ceteraque ibi disposuit juxta formam illam a se in PHILOBIBLO descriptam, qui deinceps habitus est ejusdem fundator. Donec regnante Ricardo ejus appellationis secundo, Ricardus Hatefelde episcopus item Dunelmensis ordinaret, ut secularibus aulae Aungervillianae Scholasticis certus monachorum Dunelmensium numerus adjungeretur, qui Oxoniam, studendi causa, Prioris semper Dunelmensis nutu perpetuis post temporibus amandaretur, domumque revocaretur. His ita prospectum est ab Hatefeldo ut datis abunde ad illorum sustentationem redditibus, sine ullis monasterii impensis ibi studerent. Quo beneficio ita sibi monachos demeruit, ut, oblivioni tradito Aungervillii nomine, solus ille collegii fundator usque ad monasteriorum eversionem haberetur. Hodie tamen insigne MUSAEUM sub nomine, ut dixi, Trinitatis, a bonae memoriae Domino Thoma Pope equestris ordinis viro resuscitatum; qui id longe quam antea praestantius, atque adeo studiosis quos frequentes alit commodius effecit. In ejus collegii bibliotheca, postremis Henrici octavi annis, vidi ac perlegi hunc Aungervillii librum cui PHILOBIBLI titulum indidit, eundem ipsum indubie, quem ipsemet bibliothecae illi vivus contulerat." Thomae Caii VINDICIAE Antiquitat. Acad. Oxon. edit. Hearne, Oxon. 1730. vol. ii. pag. 432.."{inverted ⁂} CATALOGUE of the WARDENS of DURHAM COLLEGE.The governors of this house were not styled Wardens, but Priors, till the foundation was fully settled. They were appointed by the Priors of the cathedral-convent of Durham.I. JOHN OF BEVERLY occurs about the year 1333. See Stevens, MONAST. i. p. 340. Twyne, APOL. ACAD. OXON. p. 170. edit. 1609.II. WILLIAM APPULBY was appointed by John of Hemingburgh, Prior of Durham, Aug. 14. 1404. Stevens, ubi supr. He was buried in the college. Wood, MSS. Mus. ASHMOL. D. 19. 4to. It may be doubted whether he was the second.III. THOMAS ROME occurs in 1413. Stevens, ibid. He was Prior of Pershore in Worcestershire. Reyner, p. 175. He was buried in Durham-college. Wood, MSS. ut supr.IV. WILLIAM EBCHESTER, D.D. occurs about the year 1440. Stevens, ubi supr. He was made Prior of Durham in 1446, and dying in 1456, was buried in his church. Wharton, ANGL. SACR i. 777. See RITES OF DURHAM CATHEDRAL, &c. by I. D. 1672. p. 50.V. ROBERT EBCHESTER. He was made bachelor of divinity, Dec. 24. 1469. Being then styled Gardianus Collegii Durelm. Wood, MSS. Mus. ASHM. D. 3. fol. 126. Compare Stevens, ubi supr. p. 343. col. z. He was made Prior of Durham in 1478, and died and was buried there in 1484. Wharton, ut supr. p. 778. 789. RITES OF DURHAM, ut supr. p. 51.VI. THOMAS SWAWELL occurs in 1502. Stevens, ut supr. p. 342. He was made doctor in divinity, in 1501. Wood, FAST. OXON. i. p. 4.VII. THOMAS CASTELL occurs in 1511. Stevens, ubi modo supr. He was made bachelor of divinity at Oxford in 1510. Wood, MSS. Mus ASHMOL. D. 3. fol. 15. And D.D. in 1511. Wood, FAST. i. 18. 20. He must not be confounded with Thomas Castell, who died Prior of Durham in 1519. Wharton, ut supr. p. 781.VIII. HUGH WHITHEAD succeeded Castell in 1512. Proceded bachelor of divinity at Oxford Mar. 14. 1511. Wood, ATH. OXON. Fast. i. 17. See also MSS. Wood, E. 9. ubi supr. viz. OPPON. in THEOLOGY. Created Doctor, May 13. 1513. ATH. OXON. i. Fast. 20. Appointed Prior of Durham in 1524. During his priorate, which he held twenty four years, he rebuilt many houses at Bear-park; and at Pittintown erected a new hall called the Prior's hall, with other edifices annexed. He was the last Prior of Durham; and, on the change of the foundation by Henry the eighth, was constituted the first Dean in 1541. He died in 1547, and was buried in the church of the Minories at London. Wharton, ubi supr. p. 782. Wood, ATH. OXON. i. Fast. 20. Willis's Cathedrals, DURHAM, p. 252. RITES of DURHAM, p. 92.IX. EDWARD HENMARSH occurs in 1527. Stevens, ut supr. p. 342. He was made S.T.B. in 1513. ATH. OXON. i. Fast. p. 20. See Wood, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. fol. 177. 180. He probably presided till the final Dissolution of this college in 1540.NUMB. VIII. Grant of Durham College in Oxford, from Edward the sixth, to George Owen, and William Martyn. Dat. Feb. iv. 1553Ex copia quadam abbreviat. In Thesauriario Coll. Trin. Oxon. Compared with the original by sir Thomas Pope..EDWARDUS sextus dei gratia, etc. omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis, quod nos in consideratione boni, veri, fidelis, et acceptabilis servicii, per servientem nostrum dilectum, Georgium Owen, armigerum, unum medicorum nostrorum, etc. de gratia nostra speciali, etc. Dedimus et concessimus, etc. prefato Georgio Owen, etc. Ac etiam totum illud messuagium, sive nuper Collegium nostrum, vocatum DURHAM COLLEDGE, in univ. Oxon. Ac totum illud Scitum, Circuitum, Ambitum, et Precinctum dicti nuper collegii vocati DURHAM COLLEDGE in univ. Oxon. predicta, cum suis juribus, membris, et pertinenciis, universis: Ac omnia et singula, domos, edificia, ortos, pomaria, gardinos, terras, tenementa, et solum nostrum, infra dictum scitum, circuitum, seu precinctum ejusdem nuper

collegii existentia, ac modo, vel nuper, in tenura sive occupatione Walteri WryghtAbout the year 1540, he was principal of Peckwater-inn at Oxford. In 1543, he was made archdeacon of Oxford, while the cathedral subsisted at Oseney. Installed a prebendary of Winchester cathedral, Jan xi. 1559. A prebendary of North-Grantham in the church of Salisbury. He was several times a commissary, and visitor, of the university of Oxford. Wood, ATH. i. F. 63. Willis's CATHEDRALS, cath. Oxford, p. 447. Gale's WINCHESTER, p. 119. On the ruin or demolition of Durham college, where he lived a few years after its dissolution, he retired to Exeter college, where he died, May x. 1561. viz. "D. pientissimus Walterus Wryght, mortem obiit in suo infra collegium nostrum, cubiculo, anno posteriore [viz. 1561.] x. Maii. Et voti compos, in sacra aede B.M. in Oxon. sepultus est. Qui ex testamento nobis dono dedit craterem unum deauratum, septem libris ponder. cum iii. libr. in pecunia." E REGISTR. coll. Exon. Oxon. fol. 76., doctoris in jure civili, vel assignatorum suorum: Necnon omnes illos boscos nostros, et arbores nostras, vulgariter nuncupatas ELMES, crescentes et existentes in le BACKSIDE dicti nuper collegii, vocati DURHAM COLLEDGE, et eidem nuper collegio dudum spectantes et pertinentes: Ac terram, fundum, et solum, eorundem boscorum et arborum, habend. tenend. et gaudend. etc. ac praedictum scitum dicti nuper collegii, prefato Georgio Owen, et Willielmo Martyn, ac haeredibus et assignatis ipsius Georgii imperpetuumI have before observed [LIFE, pag. 115.] that all the estates of Durham college, together with its site here specified, were granted by Henry viii. May xii. 1541, to the new dean and chapter of Durham. The said estates still remain in the possession of that cathedral. But how or when the said site reverted to the crown, so as to be granted by Edward the sixth to Owen and Martyn, I know not; unless this resumption was made, when the bishoprick of Durham was dissolved by Edward the fixth, An. reg. vii. 1552..

Tenend. etc. etc. ac praedictum scitum dicti nuper collegii, etc. de nobis, haeredibus et successoribus nostris, in socagio, ut de Honore nostro de EWELME in dicto com. nostro BerksIn Oxfordshire. These inaccuracies are not uncommon in antient instruments.. per fidelitatem tantum, et non in capite. Ac reddend. annuatim nobis, etc. de et pro praedicto scitu et terris dicti nuper collegii vocati DURHAM COLLEDGE, viginti sex solidos et octo denarios legalis monetae Angliae, etc. ad festum sancti Michaelis archangeli singulis annis solvendos, pro omnibus redditibus, serviciis, et demandis quibuscunque, proinde nobis, haeredibus, vel successoribus nostris, quoquomodo reddendis, solvendis, vel faciendis, etc. In cujus Rei, etc. Teste meipso apud Westmon. quarto die Feb. anno regni nostri septimo."Exam. et concordat cum Liter. pat. remanent. penes dom. G. Owen. THO. POPEManu sua.."Jur. in OfficioLege, Officina. Johannis Pycharell auditoris ibidSc. Scaccarii..NUMB. IX. Purchase of Durham college aforesaid, by sir Thomas Pope, of G. Owen and W. Martyn. Dat. Feb. xx. 1554Thesaur. ut supr..OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus, ad quos haec praesens carta nostra indentata pervenerit, Georgius Owen, armiger, unus medicorum regis et reginaeGEORGE OWEN was a man of great learning, and eminent in his profession. He was successively physician to Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, and Philip and Mary. He attended Henry on his death-bed, who made him a witness to his last will, in which he bequeathed him 100l. He was also present at the death of Edward the sixth, and attended the princess Elizabeth in her imprisonment. Leland has complimented him in his ENCOMIA of the learned men of those times. Edit. 1589. p. 96. He died 1558. Beside the grant of Durham college from Edward the sixth, he received with its adjoining estates a grant of the nunnery of Godstowe, near Oxford; the buildings of which he converted into a dwelling-house, with some few alterations and improvements., et Willielmus Martyn, generosus, salutem in domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos prefatos G. Owen, et W. Martyn, pro quadam competenti pecuniae summa nobis per THOMAM POPE de Tyttenhanger

in Co. Hertf. militem, prae manibus bene et fideliter persoluta, unde fatemur nos et quemlibet nostrum fore plenarie satisfact. et content. eundemque Thomam Pope, militem, heredes, et administratores suos inde acquietat. et exornerat. esse per praesentes, Dedisse et concessisse, et praesenti carta confirmasse prefato Thomae Pope, militi, totum illud messuagium, five nuper collegium nostrum, vocatum Dyrram College in univ. Oxon. Ac totum illum scitum, circuitum, ambitum et praecinctum nostrum, dicti nuper collegii, vocati Dyrram College in univ. Oxon. predicta; cum suis juribus, membris, et pertinenciis universis: Ac omnia et singula, domos, edificia, ortos, pomaria, gardina, terras, tenementa, et solum nostrum, infra dictum scitum, septum, circuitum, seu praecinctum, ejusdem nuper collegii existentia, ac modo, vel nuper in tenura five occupatione Walteri Wryght, doctoris in jure civili, vel assignatorum suorum: Necnon omnes illos boscos nostros, et arbores nostras, vulgariter vocatas Elmes, crescentes et existentes in le Backside dicti nuper collegii vocati Dyrram College, et eidem nuper collegio dudum spectantes et petinentes: Ac terram, fundum, et solum nostrum eorundem boscorum et arborumThe grove of Durham college was much larger at the dissolution of the said college, than at the time of this purchase. Part of it was rented by Bernard College, now saint John's. Bernard college was dissolved by Henry the eighth, who gave the said college and its appurtenances, together with a part, called half, of Durham college grove, to his new cathedral of Christ church, 1545. This part, or half, I presume, was that which had been rented, as above, by Bernard college, and was therefore considered, at the time of this donation, as its usual appendage. In the year 1555. sir Thomas Whyte, purchasing from Christ-church the said Bernard college, purchased likewise of the same, the part or half of Durham college grove above-mentioned. This part, or half, is what now makes the outer grove, and perhaps much more, of saint John's college. See Wood, Hist. Ant. ii. 252.—Stevens, Monast. ii. 53. Wood, MSS. Mus. Ashm. 8513.—And especially, Numb. VII. Append. Thus the outlet, or grove, in the text, included only what remained to Durham college after the aforesaid aliena ion made by Henry the eighth. When Trinity college and saint John's were founded, the two founders jointly erected the stone wall which now separates the groves, or gardens, of the two colleges. That this was done by agreement between them both, I collect from the words of a letter from sir Thomas Pope, to the president, dat. Jul. xxiv. 1557, in which, he desires the president to bespeak for him, a certain large quantity of stone, "for so much I think I shall occupie for my part of Mr. [sir Thomas] White's wall." Afterwards, sir T. Pope surrounded the whole grove of Trinity college with a stone-wall: and I find expended thereon cxx,l. The stone was purchased of William Freere of Oxford, who, with Agnes his wife, got possession of the houses called Dominican and Franciscan Friers at Oxford, soon after their dissolution, and demolishing the buildings fold the materials. See LIFE, p. 125. And Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. i. pag. 66. col. 2. William's elder brother Edward was afterwards settled at Water-Eaton near Oxford. Arms in the windows of the house of Mr. Freer, at Oxford, are described by Lee, 1575. ARMS, &c. Mus. Ashmol. MSS. Codd. A. Wood. D. 14.:

Ac reversionem et reversiones quascunque omnium ac singulorum praemissorum, et cujuslibet inde parcellae, necnon redditus et annualia proficua quaecunque refervata super quibuscunque dimissionibus et concessionibus de praemissis, seu de aliqua inde parcella

factis: Adeo plene, libere, et integre, ac in tam amplis modo et forma, prout illustrissimus princeps, nuper rex Edwardus, ejus nominis sextus, praedictum messuagium sive collegium et cetera singula premissa nobis prefato G. Owen et W. Martyn, ac heredibus et assignatis Mei prefati Georgii imperpetuum, per literas suas patentes, sub magno sigillo suo Angliae confectas, gerentes datum apud Westmon. iv. Feb. anno nuper regni sui septimo, dedit et concessit. Adeo plene ac libere et integre, ac in tam amplis modo et forma, prout praedictum messuagium sive collegium ac cetera premissa modo habemus seu tenemus, virtute et vigore literarum patentium praedictarum dicti nuper dom. regis, aut aliter quocumque modo. Habend. tenend. et gaudend. predictum messuagium sive collegium vocatum Dyrram College in dicta univ. Oxon. et caetera premissa, cum eorum pertinentiis universis prefato THOMAE POPE, militi, heredibus, et assignatis suis, ad solum Opus et Usum ipsius THOMAE POPE, militis, haeredum et assignatorum suorum, imperpetuum. Tenend. per redditus et servicia inde prius debita et de jure consueta. Et nos vero praefatus G. Owen, ac W. Martyn, ac haeredes et assignati Mei praefati Georgii, dictum messuagium sive collegium vocatum Dyrrham Colledge, et caetera praemissa, cum pertinentiis praefato THOMAE POPE, ac haeredibus et assignatis suis, contra nos et haeredes nostros warrantizabimus et imperpetuum defendemus per praesentes. Et cum per praedictas lit. pat. quidam annualis redditus viginti sex solidorum et duorum denariorum reservatus sit, annuatim solvendus dicto nuper regi haeredibus et successoribus suis, sicut

ibidem plenius apparet, Sciatis me prefatum G. Owen, convenisse et concessisse per praesentes, pro me, haeredibus, executoribus, ac administratoribus meis cum praefato THOMA POPE, haeredibus et assignatis suis, non modo quod eos et eorum quemlibet indempnes et sine dampno et detrimento de solucione dicti redditus, et cujuslibet inde parcellae, de caetero imperpetuum servabo, ac de omnibus oneribus et incumberantiis quibuscunque dictum collegium et caetera praemissa, seu eorum aliquod concernentibus per ipsos Georgium et Willielmum, seu eorum alterum, antehac habit. fact. aut praemissis, sed etiam, quod quandocunque et quoties contigerit, dictum redditum, seu aliquam inde parcellam, levari de praedicto collegio, situ et caeteris praemissis praeconcessis seu de aliqua inde parcella, quod tunc et toties, ego praefatus Georgius, et haeredes ac assignati mei forisfaciemus praedicto THOMAE haeredibus et assignanatis suis quadraginta Solidos nomine Paenae: Et quod tunc et toties bene licebit praedicto Thomae Pope haeredibus et assignatis suis, in omnia maneria, terras, tenementa, et haereditamenta mea infra com. Oxon. et Berks. intrare, et distringere, tam pro praedictis redditu, seu arreragiis ejusdem, aut aliqua inde parcella, sic ut praefertur, aliquo tempore posthac de eodem collegio, et caeteris, praemissis, levatis, quam pro forisfactura paenae praedictae, levatis, quam ac pro omnibus expensis et costagiis per eundem THOMAM POPE, haeredes, vel assignatos suos, per circa et concernentibus solucionem dicti redditus, paenae, aut arreragionem ejusdem, sustinendis ac solvendis: Et

districtiones sic captas abducere et asportare, et penes se retinere, quousque idem THOMAS POPE, haeredes et assignati sui, sint inde plenarie satisfacti et contenti. Sciatis insuper, nos prefatos G. Owen, et W. Martyn, fecisse, ordinasse, constituisse, deputasse, et in loco nostro posuisse dilectos nobis in Christo, Willielmum HemerfordConcerning whom I find nothing more, than that he was of Oxford; where he took the degree of A.B. in December, 1558, as Capeus secularis. Also Mar. xx, 1541, the degree of master of arts. MSS. A. Wood, Mus. Ashmol. E. 29. And E. 6., theologiae bachalarium, Johannem HeywoodProbably the same whom sir T. Pope calls, in his Will, his "trewe frynd," and to whom he bequeathes a memorial. See LIFE, p. 164. John Heywood is also one of the witnesses to the codicil of said Will., Edwardum Love, et Johanem MilwardeSir T. Pope, in his Will, calls this John Milwarde his Clerk, and leaves him a legacy of xxl. He appears to have been related to Dame Elizabeth Powlett, widow of sir T. Pope, and was probably of her neighbourhood in Derbyshire. Ex Testam. More of the name are mentioned in her Will. William and Robert are witnesses to her deed of gift at Burton upon Trent. LIFE, p. 200. Sir T. Pope, in a letter to the president of his college, without date, speaks of "Henry Milwarde my friend:" and one of that name occurs among the first FAMULI of the college at the foundation. Comp. Burss. 1556.—7. As to the said John Milwarde, mentioned in the text, he was, beside what has been already said, one of the witnesses to the codicil of sir T. Pope's will. He was also a witness to the instrument concerning the dirge at Much-Waltham. LIFE, p. 132. On sir T. Pope's death he became steward, or receiver, to sir Hugh Powlett. Registr. prim. coll. Trin. fol. 24. b. In 1561, Decemb. vii, the said college appointed him their attorney in a certain law-suit, calling him in their Appointment, "Joannem Milwarde generosum, clarissimi Hugonis Paulet militis famulum." Registr. ut supr. fol. 29. He occurs often as an agent between the said college and Dame Powlett the foundresse; as I collect from these articles, viz. Comp. Burss. 1561.—2. "Sol. pro uno pari chirothecarum dat. Mag. Joh. Milwarde ex mandato praesidis et officiariorum, ijs. ivd."—Comp. 1563.—4. "Sol. Jul. xxii. pro cena mag. Milwarde adferentis mandatum a domina fundatrice de lustranda porcione silvae, ijs. viijd." Again in the same year. "Sol. pro epulis insumptis in mag. [Simon.] Parrett, etc. et Joannem Milwarde, vs. viijd." He sometimes acted as deputy-steward to Dame Elizabeth Powlett. I find him more than once, presenting a new-year's gift to the college; and as late as 1582. He also occurs on some other occasions. One Arderne Milwarde is elected schol. coll. Trin. è com. Oxon. in 1583. Ex registr. That the family was of Derbyshire, as above hinted, I conclude from the following entry. "Henricus Milwarde filius Johannis de Snitterton, co. Derb. &c." Ex Registr. in pergamen. ab Ao. 1665. fol. 7., generosos,

nostros veros et legitimos attornatos, conjunctim etdivisim, ad intrandum et ingrediendum in praedictum messuagium, sive collegium et caetera praemissa et in quamlibet inde parcellam, ac plenam et pacificam posessionem statum et seisinam inde, vice et nominibus nostris, capiendum: Et post hujusmodi possessionem statum et seisinam inde sic captam et habitam, deinde eadem ad dandum et deliberandum praefato THOMAE POPE, militi, aut suo in ea parte attornato, secundum vim, formam, et effectum hujus presentis carte nostre: Ratum ac firmum habentes, et habituri, totum et quicquid attornati nostri fecerint, seu eorum aliquis fecerit, in premissis. IN CUJUS rei testimonium huic presenti carte indentate partes praedicte sigilla

sua alternatim apposuerunt. DATUM vicesimo die Februarii, Annis regnorum Philippi et Mariae, etc. etc. primo et secundoIt appears, that in process of time, the pension of xxvjs. viijd. herein mentioned, remained unpaid into the exchequer for several years, through the neglect of the heirs or assigns of George Owen: insomuch, that the payment of the same fell on the new college, to the amount of about twenty pounds. Whereupon, on due representation. James the first orders Abbot archbishop of Canterbury, Williams bishop of Lincoln, and lord keeper, and Andrewes bishop of Winchester, "out of his gracious and princely care of the good of all colledges," to direct a precept to the said heirs, requiring them forthwith to repair to the president; and to make full satisfaction for the past, and entirely to relieve the college for the future. Which they did, by an instrument dated at Whitehall, Feb. xix. 1622. and signed with their own hands. In Thesauriar. coll. Trin..Per me GEORGIUM OWEN.WILLIELMUS MARTYN.NUMB. X. Preamble of Letters Patent, from Philip and Mary, for founding Trinity College at Oxford. Dat. Mar. viii. 1554.—5Thes. ut supr. in Cist. Et in 1. Part. Orig. de Ann. 1, 2. Phil. et Mar. In Offic. Rememorat. Scaccar. Et inter Lit. Pat. Phil. et Mar. Ann. Reg. 1, 2. Part. 5. In Capel. Rotul..PHILIPPUS et Maria, dei gratia, rex et regina Angliae, Franciae, Neapolis, Jerusalem, et Hiberniae, fidei defensores, principes Hispaniarum et Siciliae, archiduces Austriae, duces Mediolani, Burgundiae et Brabantiae, comites Haspurgiae, Flandriae, et Tirolis, omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem. Cum praedilectus et fidelis consiliarius noster THOMAS POPE, miles, instinctu charitatis, divina praeveniente gratia, in animum induxerit quoddam COLLEGIUM de uno praesidente, presbitero, et de duodecem sociis, graduatis, quorum quatuor semper erunt presbyteri, ac de octo scholaribus, infra universitatem nostram Oxon, in quadam domo sive messuagium vulgariter vocato Derham Colledge, a infra et scitum et precinctum ejusdem, de novo

erigere, creare, et in tempus perpetuum stabilire, in honorem sanctae et individuae TRINITATIS, et dei omnipotentis gloriam: Ac etiam unam liberam Scolam, infra villam de Hokenorton, vel alibi infra com. Oxon. in honorem nominis JESU, vulgariter vocandam Jesus Scolehowse: Ac idem Collegium, maneriis, terris, redditibus, et proventibus, ex sua munificentia, ad sufficientem sustentationem eorundem Collegii et Schole, liberaliter dotare, ac ornamentis, utensilibus, et aliis bonis convenientibus, sufficienter ornare, in maximum scolarium literis ibidem incumbenitum solamen et incitamentum, optimumque omnibus simile posthac imitandum praebens exemplum; ac etiam in communem utilitatem omnium subditorum nostrorum: Nosque igitur, ut haec sua devota intentio debitum et perpetuum, nostra regia mediante auctoritate et facultate, sortiatur effectum, ad humilem petitionem ejusdem THOMAE, etc. etc. etc.Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. octavo die Marcii, annis regnorum nostrorum primo et secundo. Per ipsos Reg. et ReginSigned HARE, i. e. sir Nicholas Hare, master of the rolls..NUMB. XI. Part of the CHARTER of ESTABLISHMENT of the said college, in consequence of the foregoing Letters Patent. Dat. Mar. xxviii. 1555In Thesauriar. praedict..OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc scriptum pervenerit. Thomas Pope, de Tyttenhanger in com Hertf. miles, salutem in domino sempiternam. Sciatis, quod ego prefatus THOMAS, licentia regia ad omnia et singula subscripta perficienda primitus habita et obtenta, prout per literas suas patentes, gerentes datum apud Westmon. octavo die Marcii, annis regnorum suorum primo et secundo, plenius liquet et apparet: Ad dei omnipotentis gloriam, ac in honorem sanctae et individuae Trinitatis, per praesentes, virtute licenciae praedictae, erigo, creo, stabilio, et fundo, unum collegium de uno praesidente presbytero, duodecem sociis graduatis, quorum quatuor erunt presbiteri, ac de octo scholaribus, perpetuis duraturis temporibus infra scitum et praecinctum cujusdam domus meae, vulgariter vocatae Derham College, situatae et existentis infra

univ. Oxon. Et ulterius volo et ordino, quod idem collegium, sic per me creatum et erectum, Collegium sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex fundatione Thomae Pope militis, nuncupabitur et appellabitur. Et ut collegium praedictum de personis congruis et convenientibus adimpleatur et decoretur; sciatis, Me prefatum Thomam Pope, de moribus, doctrina ac industria, dilecti mihi in Christo Thome Slythurst, clerici, sancte Theologiae Baccalarei, et caeterorum hic per me nominandorum, plurimum confidentem; constituisse et ordinasse prefatum Thomam Slythurst primum et modernum praesidentem presbyterum dicti collegii: et Stephanum Markes, artium magistrum, Robertum NewtonAt this time fellow of Exeter college. The next year, viz. xvii. Oct. 1557, he was elected annual rector of the said house. Wood MSS. Mus. Ashm. E. 29. Afterwards he was elected the second perpetual rector of that college, Nov. ii. 1570. This office he resigned Oct. iv. 1578. Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 94. col. 2., Joannem Barwyke, Jacobum Bell, Rogerum Crispyn, Johannem Rychardeson, Thomam Scotte, Georgium Sympson, artium baccalareos, primos et modernos socios et scholares dicti collegii: et Johannem Arden, Johannem Comporte, Johannem Perte, et Johannem Langsterre, primos et modernos scholares ejusdem collegii: Reservans mihi, et executoribus meis, authoritatem et plenam potestatem nominandi et eligendi residuos socios et scholares, usque ad completionem numeri in licentia regia contenti.—Sciatisque ulterius, ut omnia et singula premissa debitum et perpetuum sortiantur effectum, quod ego

Thomas Pope, do, ac per praesentes concedo, eisdem praesidenti, sociis, et scholaribus, totum illud messuagium (sive nuper collegium) meum, vocatum Derham college in univ. Oxon. ac totum illum scitum, etc. adeo plene, libere, integre, ac in tam amplis modo ac forma, prout praedictum messuagium—nuper habui, virtute ac vigore perquisitionis inde per me factae de Georgio Owen, etc. etcThe remainder, in which it is specified that they shall be a body politick in nomine and re, shall plead and be impleaded, with other privileges usual in forms of this kind, is therefore omitted. Together with a Grant of new Lands, &c..Dat. Mar. xxviii. 1, 2. Phil. Mar.Sub Sigillo et Manu Dom. THOMAE POPE.NUMB. XII. Letter of Attorney from Thomas Slythurste, for taking possession of a certain messuage in Oxford, called Trinity College. Dat. Mar. xxiii. 1555Thesauriar. ut supr..NOVERINT universi per praesentes, me Thomam Slythurste, Canonicum sive Prebendarium libere capelle sancti Georgii martyris infra castrum regium de Wyndesore in com Barks. sacre theologie bacalarium, feciffe, constituisse, et in loco meo posuisse, dilectos mihi in Christo Stephanum Markes, artium magistrum, et Robertum Newton, artium bacalarium, meos veros et legitimos attornatos conjunctim et divisim, ad intrandum et ingrediendum, pro me, vice et nomine meo, in unum messuagium cum pertinenciis suis universis in univ. Oxon. vocatum Collegium sancte et individue Trinitatis in univ. Oxon. praedicta, ex fundatione venerabilis viri Thome Pope, militis, ac plenam et pacificam possessionem et seisinam inde capiendam: et post hujusmodi seisinam sic inde receptam et habitam, eandem ad meum proprium usum retinend. et custodiend.

secundum vim, formam et effectum cujusdam donationis, Mihi et aliis facte per prefatum venerarabilem Thomam Pope, militem, ut per eandem donationem inde confectam, cujus Dat. xxviii. die mensis Martii annnis reg. Phil. et Mar. reg. et regin. prim. et sec. manifeste liquet et apparet. Caeteraque omnia ac singula quae in premissis, vel circa ea, necessaria fuerint seu quomodolibet oportuna, vice et nomine meo facienda, exequenda, et finienda, adeo plenarie ac integre prout facere possem seu deberem, si in premissis personaliter interessem. Ratum gratumque habens et habiturus, totum et quicquid dicti mei attornati conjunctim et divisim meo nomine fecerint in premissis per praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium, sigillum meum apposui. Dat. apud Chalfont sancti Petri, xxviii. Marcii, annis regnor. Phil. et Mar. etc. primo et secundo.Per me THOMAM SLYTHURSTEManu et sigill. ipsius..NUMB. XIII. Admission of the first President, Fellows, and Scholars, of the said college, on the Eve of Trinity-Sunday, May, xxx, 1556Registr. prim. dict. coll. fol. 1. a..OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Sciatis, quod anno domini millesimo quingentesimo quinquagesimo sexto, tricesimo die mensis Maii, qui eo anno vigilia sanctissimae Trinitatis extitit, in presentia Mri Roberti MorwentI find the same person, at the time of founding saint John's college, employed by sir T. Whyte, xviii. Jun. 1, 2. Phil. Mar. to take possession of Bernard college, and its appurtenances, just before granted from Christ Church to the said sir Thomas Whyte for the foundation of saint John's college. Collectan. MSS. Wood, Mus. Ashmol. 8513.—He was nominated one of the first fellows of C. C. C. by bishop Fox, the founder, and appointed by him, perpetual vice-president. He died 1558. Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 232. He was eminent for his learning, and a singular encourager of literature. Fulman, in his manuscript corrections of Wood's HIST. and ANTIQ. OXON. informs us, that Morwent was appointed by bishop Fox to succeed Claymond, the first president of that college, without election. MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. 9. 4to. pag. 40., praesidis collegii Corporis Christi in univ.

Oxon. et notarii publici infrascripti, ac aliorum quorum nomina inferius in hoc instrumento continentur: Magister Thomas Slythurste, sacrae theologiae bacalarius, et canonicus prebendarius liberae capellae regis et reginae in castro suo de Wyndesore, oriundus ex com. Berks. Sarum dioces. primus PRAESES nominatus ac assignatus collegii sanctissimae et individuae Trinitatis in univ. Oxon. praedicta, ex fundatione venerabilis viri domini THOMAE POPE militis, juramentum subiit in Sacello dicti collegii de Officio PRAESIDIS rite et fideliter ibidem administrando; magistro Roberto Morwent praedicto hujusmodi juramentum, virtute literarum sibi a Fundatore missarum ac ibidem palam et publice lectarum, exigente. Forma autem juramenti ab eodem praestiti de verbo in verbum sequitur. Ego Thomas Slythurste, &c, &c. Qui quidem PRAESES sic juratus, eisdem die, loco, et anno, a magistris, Arthuro Yeldarde, com. Northumberl. Dioces. Dunelm. et Stephano Markes, com. Cornub. Dioces. Exon.—in facultate artium magistris: Et magistro Joanne Barwyke, com. Devon. Dioces. Exon. in facultate artium inceptore: et dominis Joanne Bell, com. Somerset. Bath. et Well. Dioces.—Joanne Richardson, com. Cumberland. Dioces. Carliol.—Georgio Rudde, com. Westmoreland. Dioces. Dunelm.—Thoma Scotte, com. Cumberland. Dioces. Carliol.—Rogero Crispyn,
com. Devon. Dioces. Exon.—Roberto Evans, com. Cornub. Dioces. Exon.—Joanne Perte, com. Warwic. Dioces. Litchf. et Cov.—Roberto Bellamie, com. et Dioces. Eboraci, artium bacalariis, et in SOCIOS dicti collegii per prefatum Fundatorum nominatis et ascitis, juramentum ad SOCIORUM Officium, juxta statutorum dicti collegii normam, bene et fideliter praestandum, exigebat. Tenor autem juramenti ab ipsis tunc praestiti sic habet. Ego. &c. &c. Eodem etiam die, sine temporis intervallo domini Johannes Langsterre, com. et Dioces. Ebor. annos natus novemdecim ad festum divi Joannis Baptistae proxime precedens, et Reginaldus Braye, com. Bedford. Dioces. Lincoln. annorum octodecim ad festum divi Johannis praedictum, artium bacalarii: Joannes Arden, com. et Dioces. Oxon. annorum octodecim ad festum Pasche proxime precedens, Joannes Comporte, com. Middlesex. Dioces. London. annorum octodecim ad initium quadragesime precedentis, Robertus Thraske, com. Somerset. dioces. Exon. annorum octodecim ad festum purificationis precedens, Gulielmus Saltmarshe, com. et dioces. Ebor. annorum octodecim ad festum divi Lucae precedens, et Jacobus Harrys, com. Glouc. dioces. Bristol. annorum septemdecim ad festum divi Johannis Baptistae precedens, in facultate artium studentes non graduati, in SCOLARES dicti collegii per Fundatorem nominati et asciti; dicto Praesidi juramentum, de officio SCOLARIUM in ipso collegio humiliter et prompte per ipsos et ipsorum quemlibet praestando, dederunt, in hunc qui sequitur modum. Ego. &c. &c. Sociis

autem et Scholaribus sic juratis, ad OFFICIARIORUM electionem processum est pro anno illo instanti. In qua quidem electione, magister Markes ad VICE-PAESIDENTIS officium, ex mandato domini Fundatoris deputatus est: magister Barwyke in DECANUM, dominus Richardson ac dominus Perte, in BURSARIOS, per electionem assumpti sunt: magister Yeldarde, ex Domini Fundatoris voluntate LECTORIS PHILOSOPHICI, dominus Bell, LECTORIS RETORICI, per electionem, onera suscipiunt. Horumque singuli, juxta statuta de suo cujusque fideliter obeundo officio, corporale juramentum dederunt, in presentia omnium Sociorum et Scholarium. His demum ita peractis, prefatus magister Robertus Morwent, Praesidis et Officiariorum manibus sigillum commune collegii, a Fundatore prius acceptum et apud se interea temporis reservatum, tradidit: quo in collegii Gazophilacio firmiter reposito, dictus Praeses, Socii, et Scolares, vespertinas preces, cum cantu et nota, solemniter sactissimae Trinitati ea nocte persolverunt. Ac in crastino, matutinas, et alias diei horas, una cum missa honorifice celebrarunt. Inter cujus quidem missae solennia, habita est a Praeside concio ad populumThis SERMON, (improperly styled ad populum,) of the first President, was in the hands of Dr. Charlett: and I find the following short extract from it, among the papers of Mr. Wise. [MSS. F. Wise.] "Jam vero quibus orationis praeconiis oportunam venerabilis admodum FUNDATORIS nostri MUNIFICENTIAM praedicare pergam, qui caducam hujus Academiae famam redintegrare, fortunasque bonarum literarum collapsas in solidum revocare, COLLEGIUM novum stabiliendo, proventusque et possessiones ampliter elargiendo, ut videtis, obnixe laborat? Studiorum tantae jam nunc, et antea fuerunt angustiae, ut de artibus et scientiis penitus actum esset, nisi hujus unius auctoritate, prudentia, gratia, voluntate, liberalitate, res nostrae constitissent. Id quod vivus etiamnum valensque praestitit: horum beneficiorum testis oculatus ipse futurus. Quam magnis et praemiis et commodis ex ejus insigni pietate studia nunc instaurabimus, hi parietes quasi pleno disertoque ore loquuntur. Taceo hoc in loco, ubi tot ejus ALUMNOS eruditione celebres aspicio, ut literatos homines unice semper amaverit, et muneribus et favore complexus assidue fuerit, VIR amplissimus, et ipse literis ac doctrinis rite excultus. Pariter etiam novistis, quam largus est in pauperes et egenos, in rebus gerendis dexter, strenuus, et officiosus, religionis avitae tenax, &c." No great credit is due to professed panegyrics. But these commendations are neither extravagant, nor unsupported by facts., qui frequens illuc

et multus confluxerat gratulabundus, et omnia fausta nascenti collegio exoptaturus. Qui quidem universus, una cum collegiorum praesidibus, splendido et magnifico, eo die, excepti sunt convivio. Et ut hinc facile conjiciatur, quanto cum applausu et gratulatione exordium sumpserit hoc collegium; ac praeterea ut optime meriti beneficiorum suorum memoria, ac debita laude, non fraudentur: visum est hic, in perpetuum rei monumentum, commemorare, quaenam donaria a quamplurimis munificis viris, in ipsius veluti crepundiis, acceperit hoc collegium. Primo, a venerabili sacerdote, magistro Thoma SothernThomas Southern was elected fellow of Magdalene college, Oxford, about 1500, and occurs as such at a visitation of that college by bishop Fox, in 1506. He is otherwise called one of Ingledew's chaplains there, with a salary of ten mar. Registr. Fox. Winton. lib. ii. fol. 44, 51, b. 52. b. et seq. He was elected boreal proctor of the university, of Oxford, May 2, 1511. Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 417. He was also fellow of Eton college, in 1512. Willis, MSS. collectan. co. Bucks. fol. No. 23. in bibl. Bodl. He was instituted vicar of Modbury, co. Devon. Mar. 17. 1517, at the presentation of Eton college. registr. Oldham, Exon. This vicarage he resigned in 1523. registr. Veysey, Exon. He was instituted rector of Farringdon, co. Hants, Jun. 5. 1519, being then styled A.M. at the presentation of Hugh Oldham, bishop of Exeter: which rectory he resigned in 1524. registr. Fox. Winton. lib. iv. fol. 15. b. and lib. v. fol. 168. He was made treasurer of Exeter cathedral, May 8, 1531. Le Neve's Fasti, p. 91. He was appointed, by the name of "Thomas Sothern clerke," a commissioner, with others, for suppressing heresies in the diocese of Exeter, Feb. 16, 1556. Wilkins, Concil. iii. 140. He died in 1557. Wood. Athen. Oxon. i. f. 8. His will is dated April 30, 1556. Proved Jul. 24, 1557. In registr. Wrestley. qu. 25. cur. praerog. Cant. The legacy mentioned in the text proved to be a mistake. By the said will, he bequeathes the sum of xiijl. vjs. viijd. to the fabric of Exeter cathedral; and orders the whole choir of the church to attend his obsequies: from whence it may be concluded that he was buried in his cathedral. He likewise founds an obit in the said church. Ingledew's chaplains, or fellows, abovementioned, were restrained to natives of the diocese of York and Durham., ecclesiae cathedralis Exoniensis Thesaurario,
See LIFE, p. 127.viginti libras aureas monetae optimae, dono accepit; ultra quinquaginta libras, quas eidem post mortem suam, per testamentum legaverat. Deinde, ad convivium in ipso sanctissimae Trinitatis die splendidius ac liberalius faciendum, Mag. Edovardus LoveThe founder's brother in law, and steward, See LIFE, p. 182. These things, I presume, he sent by the founder's orders., generosus, collegio misit cunicellos quadraginta

octo, agnos tres, capones novemdecim, porcellos tres, anserulos quatuordecim, pipiones quinquies duodenas, damas duos, et vitulum unum: Dominus Georgius GyffordeGeorge Gyfford occurs dubbed a knight of the carpet, by queen Mary, the day following her coronation, in the chamber of presence at Westminster. MSS. Dugd. Mus. Ashm. B. 173. A visitor of the monasteries. Dugd. Warw. p. 800. A supervisor of chantries in com. Bucks, 1549. Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. 38. He interceded with lord Cromwell for the preservation of the monastery of Wolstrope, and other houses, which he visited. See LIFE, p. 27. He was buried, Jan. 7, 1557, according to Strype, with much magnificence. Eccl. Mem. iii. 389. He was of Buckinghamshire; of which county he was a representative in queen Mary's first parliament held at Oxford, 1554. Willis, Not. parl. ed. 1730. p. 89. Compare MISCELLANEOUS ANTIQUITIES, pp. 37. 40. Numb. i. Printed at Strawberry Hill, 1772. 4to., miles, cunicellos viginti quatuor, et pullos gallinaceos duodecem: Magister CrockerThe founder mentions him in a letter to the president, 15 Feb. 1557. "I have sent you by Mr. Crocker your Cross with a case." He was probably of Hook-Norton, co. Oxon. See Strype's Annals, Vol. iv. 123. N. 79. App. One John Crocker, esquire of Hook-norton, is mentioned by Dugdale, presenting to the church of Warmington, in Warwickshire, Sept. 10, 1554. WARWICKSHIRE, p. 417. Many of the name are buried in Hook-Norton church. Particularly John Croker, 1568. See also Lee's Visitation, MSS. ut supr. p. 26. I find Sir Edward North alienating to John Croker the manor of Melcomb, co. Oxon. Licent. Alienat. 7 Feb. 35 Hen. viii. Part. 18., generosus, dimidiatum bovem, et agnum unum: Magister EdmundesThe founder's uncle. See LIFE, p. 2., generosus, damam unum, et vitulum unum: Magister Antonius

ArdernThe founder's relations. See LIFE, p. 121. 183. He mentions John Arden of Cottisford, co. Oxon. in his will. And in Comp. Burss. 1587.—8. I find,"Sol. magistro Seller equitanti Kirtleton cum xeniolo ad Mag. Ardern. ivd. [This was Antony(See Registr. PERROT, infra citat NUMB. xxi. fol. 112. a.).]"Sol. pro chirothecis magistri Ardern. vs. This name is often written Arden. It was an ancient family, originally of Warwickshire. Dugd. Warw. and MSS. Lee, Visit. Oxfordsh. I cannot find out "Panes sex solidorum," but suppose it was some species of manchet. In lord Guilford's pedigree of POPE, Arden occurs very early. generosus, vitulum dimidiatum, anserulos duos, porcellum unum, et caponem unum: Magister Ricardus Ardern, generosus, panes sex solidorum: Magister PlatteOr Plotte. Bartholomew Plotte of Sparsholt, in Berkshire, appears to have married the founder's uncle's daughter. Ashmole's Berks. iii. 285., generosus, ovem unam, et anserulos duos: Magister YatesA college tenant, and one of the founder's mother's relations. See LIFE, p. 2. and Indentur. in Registr. prim. coll. fol. 13., generosus, ovem unam: OrpewoodeAlice Orpwood, mother of Rob. Parrot, whose descendants were connected with Northly, died 1558. See LIFE, p. 183. and App. XXI. de Northlea ovem unam: Brianus de CoggesBoth, the founder's brothers in law, and, I suppose his tenants or retainers. See LIFE, p. 184. anserulos duos, et pullos duos: Magistra IrisheIn whose house Cranmer and Ridley were confined, at Oxford; her husband, a vintner, being mayor of the city. Ridley particularly mentions her in a letter, dat. May 31, 1555, but with no very favorable circumstances. "Viro, in cujus aedibus ego custodior, uxer dominatur—vir ipse, Irischius nomine, satis mitis est omnibus: uxori vero plusquam obsequentissimus." Ridley's LIFE of Ridley, 589, 663.—She was buried in St. Martin's church, Oxon. 1556. MSS. Wood. Bib. Bodl. Rawl., oppidana, lagenam vini unam:

Magister FurseI find Thomas Furres, or Firse, senior bailiff of the city, 1556. Wood's Cat. of Mayors, &c. MSS. Mus. Ashm D. 7.—p. 118. I find also John Bridgeman, senior bailiff, 1531. ibid. with Wood's note, in marg. that he married Mary the sister of sir Thomas Whyte, founder of St. John's, p. 114., oppidanus, lagenam vini unam: Magister BridgemanBridgeman was perhaps a vintner of the city of Oxford, as were Furse and Irishe, here also mentioned. Registr. Cur. Cancell. Oxon. notat. GG. fol. 32. "Feb. iii. 1548. Quo die compar. personaliter, Magister Edmundus Irye, &c. &c. Thomas Furse, &c. &c. and in the presens of them all, Mr. Chauncellor dyd decreye, that they and every of theym shall sell redde wyne, claret wyne, and whyte wyne, after xiiijd. the gallon. And all other, sellynge the same wynes within the citie of Oxforde, shall selle after the same rate." ARCHIV. Univ. Oxon., oppidanus, dimidiatam vini lagenam, cum fragis. Convivio autem finitoConcerning this feast, I find the following articles, Comp. Burss. 1556."Sol. in regardo famulis diversorum generosorum apportantibus a dominis suis missa munera, et aliis occupatis in curandis cibis, aliisque negotiis, in die sancte Trinitatis. xviijs. vd."Sol. in expensis factis in festo sanctiss. Trin. ultra omnem allocationem. xxvijs. vd.At antient feasts it was the custom for friends to send in presents of provision. Thus at the inthronisation-feast of archbishop Wareham, in 1504. "In Expensis necessariis, unae cum regardis datis diversis personis venientibus cum diversis exhenniis." Batteley's CANTERBURY. Lond. 1703. Append. Suppl. p. 28., et actis Altissimo gratiis, decedentes hospites et extranei omnes, Sociis et Scolaribus suum collegium bene

precantes relinquunt; aptum post quietem adeptam, futurum musis ac bonis literis domiciliumIt appears however that although the whole number, one scholar excepted, was first admitted in a formal and legal manner on this day, that ten fellows and seven scholars had lived in the college, and received all emoluments and allocations, for nine weeks before, viz. from the feast of the Annunciation preceeding, with which day the first Computus begins. In which nine weeks, I find also,"Sol. pro quatuor diebus pietanciae in septimana Paschae praecedentis, viz pro ipso die Paschae, et tribus feriis sequentibus. xxvj.s. viij.d."Sol. pro quatuor diebus pietanciae in septimana Pentecostes praeterlapsae, dominica viz. et tribus feriis sequentibus. xxvj.s viij.d. And although this Computus ends at Michaelmas following, I find,"Sol. pro uno die pietantiae anticipato ex mandato Fundatoris, viz. pro obitu Fundatoris in mense novembris futuro [die 16.] Which obit was afterwards appointed to the seventh of August, on which it is still continued. And though the obit for his wife Margaret was then on Jan. 16, yet they kept it within the time of this Accompt. viz Term. ii Septim i."Sol. pro uno die pietantiae, viz. pro obitu Domine Margarete uxoris nostri Fundatoris. vjs. viijd.This Computus begins with the feast of the Annunciation, and ends with the Michaelmas following. Some articles are charged for one term, or quarter, that is from Trinity to Michaelmas, and some for the whole half year, viz."Sol. lectori philosophico per annum dimidiatum. . . . ."Sol. lectori linguae latinae pro uno termino. . . ."Sol pulsanti organa pro uno termino. . ."Sol. celebrantibus missam matutinalem pro 1 termino, et tertia parte precedentis . . ."Sol. pro focalibus, viz. pro carbonibus et ligno ab initio collegii usque ad fest. S. Michaelis archangeli proxime seq. per xvii Septimanas . . . . From all which circumstances, taken together, it is manifest, that they were resident, though perhaps not fully settled, in the college, before the formal admission specified in this instrument..ACTA sunt haec, eo quo scribuntur modo, Anno Dom. praedict. necnon die et mense praedictis, in presentia publici notarii subscripti, et Magistrorum Roberti Morwent, Arthuri Yeldarde, testium meorum, et aliorum plurimorum. Et ego, &c. [Deest nomen notarii.]NUMB. XVI. Conditions relating to the intended Foundation of a free grammar-School, at Dedington, Co. Oxon. by Sir Thomas PopeEx Indentura quadripart. Dat. April 1. 1, 2. Phil. et Mar. 1555. In Thesauriar. praedict.."THE said president, fellowes, and schollers, [of Trinity college Oxford,] shall yerely for evermore give and pay unto one hable person, well and sufficiently lerned and instructed in gramer and humanitie, which shall be SCHOLE-MASTER of and at a frescole, to be called Thesus Scole of the foundation of the said sir Thomas Pope, to be erected at Dedington in the said countie of Oxon, and to teach children gramer and humanitie there frely, for his yerely salarye and wages, xx markes, of good and lawfull money: And to one other hable and lerned person in gramer to be USHER within the said freschole, yerely viiil of good and lawfull money, to teache children likewise ther frely. The same severall salaries and wages to be paid to the said scolemaster

and usher yerely, at two termes in the yeare: that is to saye, at the feast of Thannunciacion of our ladie saint Marie and saint Mighell Tharchaungell, or within one quarter of a yere next after any of the said feastes, by even portions. And that the said scolemaster and usher, after the erection of the said scole, to be in the said scole, as is aforesaid, shall be from tyme to tyme for ever namyd and appoynted by the president, fellows, and scollers, of the said colledge, and of their successoures or the most part of them. And the said scolemaster and usher so to be namyd and appoyntyd, to have and enjoye the said offices of scolemaster and ushershipp during lyf; unless some fawlt, offence, or notable cryme, be commytted or don by any of them, and sufficiently proved agaynst any of them, that then uppon such fawlt or cryme so commytted or don, and proved, as is aforesaid, the partie commyttinge such fawlt, offence, or cryme, to lose his said rome, and a new to be namyd for him, as is aforesaid. And the said scolemaster, and usher and scollers, that shall be in the said scole, to be furder and otherwise ordered concerninge the order and rules of the said Scole, and good contynuaunce thereof, as shal be appoynted by the said sir Thomas Pope in his life, or after his death by the said dame Elisabeth his wife, within the statutes of the said colledge, or by any other writing sealed and subscribed by the handes of either of them. And the residew of the said revenues and profitts [besides certain other uses] for the charge of the reparacions

of the said scolehouse and other reasonable charges that such of the said colledge as shall yearlie survey the said scolehouse, for the performance of the good orders therein to be continualie kept, shall be put unto, about the said survey.—"NUMB. XV. Account of a petition referred to the princess Elisabeth at Hatfield, by sir Thomas Pope, in August, 1556Registr. prim. Coll. praedict. fol. 7. a..AD futuram rei memoriam, atque ut alienis periculis edocti praesentes ac futuri hujus collegii socii ac scolares, cautius quod ad statutorum observantiam pertinet sese gerere discant. Sciatis, quod vicesimo die Augusti, anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo quinquagesimo sexto, et hujus collegii anno primo; Dominus Geogius Sympson, lector philosophicus, et Dominus Georgius Rudde, artium bachalarii, et dicti collegii socii, ob violatum statutum De muris noctu non scandendis, juxta ejusdem statuti exigentiam perpetuae amotionis et expulsionis a collegio poena fuisse punitos, sine spe regressus quam ullo modo in eodem habebant reliquam. Unde ad venerabilem virum Dominum Thomam Pope, dicti collegii Fundatorem, tanquam ad Sacram Anchoram, confugere conati, de perpetrato crimine impunitatem, aut saltem poenae mitigationem, suppliciter petituri. Aegre tandem, ac nonnisi mediantibus

ac intercedentibus excellentissima principe Domina Elizabetha, serenissimae Mariae sorore, cui tunc ab intimis consiliis dictus Fundator fuit, ac etiam propria conjuge, praenobili femina Domina item Elizabetha, exauditi sunt. Atque ita datis literis ad mag. Thomam Slythurste, tum collegii sui Praesidem, dicti duo bachalarii publice in communi collegii aula, crimen suum coram omnibus tum sociis tum scolaribus agnoscentes, in societatem denuo recepti sunt: indicta illis per dictum praesidem et officiarios mulcta viz. vj. s. viij. d. ad duas cortinas bombycinas emendas, pro Summi Altaris, in Sacello collegii, ampliori ornatu. Literarum autem proditarum tenor de verbo in verbum ad hunc qui sequitur modum se habetInserted in LIFE, pag. 84..NUMB. XVI. An indenture made May 5, 1556, "witnessing that the president, fellows, and schollers of Trinity college Oxford, have received of their founder, such parcells of churche playte and ornamentes of the church, as hereafter followetheE Registro praedict. fol. 8. a.."FFYRST, a chalice with a patent [paten] gilt, weyingee xx. oz. iii. quartersOf all the plate given by the founder, this is the only piece now remaining. All that he gave, enumerated in various parts of this work, was either abolished as superstitious in the year 1570, this piece excepted, or granted to king Charles the first in the year 1642. It is well known that all the colleges in Oxford contributed their plate to that monarch's necessities. A laudable and very seasonable proof of loyalty, but much regretted by the lovers of antient art, as it destroyed many valuable specimens of curious workmanship not elsewhere preserved, in an article which our magnificent ancestors carried to a most superb and sumptuous excess.—I take this occasion of mentioning here two pieces of plate formerly belonging to the said college, granted with the rest to king Charles, which would at present have been great curiosities: their inscriptions are thus recorded. "Poculum collegii S. et individuae Trinitatis Oxon. ex dono Joannis Denham unici filii Joannis Denham militis et unius baronum scaccarii. 1631." 17 oz This was Denham the poet, author of COOPER's HILL, &c. The other was inscribed, "Ex dono Jacobi Harrington equitis aurati filii natu maximi et hujus collegii comm." 13 oz. dim. 3. d. No date. This was Harrington, author of the OCEANA. [Ex quadam schedul. in thesauriar. Coll. antedict.] Who little suspected, that this innocent memorial of gratitude to the place of his education, would be converted into a contribution, however inconsiderable, for the support of royalty.. Item, one

other chalice with a patentPaten., parcell gilt, poz. xiii. oz. di. Item, a pipe of sylver, parcell gilt, poz. xiii. oz. di. Item a pax of ivory garnyshed with sylver and gilt, and sett with counterfeete stones. Item, a chappel-crosse of copper, with Marye and John, and a foote to the same, gilt. Item, a pair of censors of copper. Item, ii. pair of latten candlestickes for the altar. Item, a holye water-stop of latten. Item ii crewettes of tynne. Item a pint bottell of tynne for the chappell. Item a deske to lay a mass booke upon, pained grene. Item, a lectorneProperly a desk for reading the lessons. Lutrin Fr. of waynscott for the quere [choir.] Item, ii. fair antyphonersAntiphonarium. Lat. of parchmente lymnedIlluminated. with gold. Item, a fair legeantOr LECTIONARY, which contained all the lessons, whether from scripture, or other books, which were directed to be read in the course of the year. Rot. Comp. Coll. Winton. A.D. 1479. MS. "Pro reparacione magne Legende, iijs. ivd. [legend] of parchmente lymned with

gold. Item, iiii. graylesThe Grail or Gradual contained all that was sung by the choir at high-mass. of parchmente lymned with gold. Item a rector chori of parchmente lymned with gold. Item, a fair mass booke of parchmente lymned with gold, and covered with blacke velvette. Item, a mass-booke of parchmente covered with leather. Item, a psalter for the quere printed with note. Item a suite of vestmentes of red clothe of tissue orphrysed with needle worke, with iii. albes, stoles, and fannelsSee Dusresne, LAT. GLOSS. V. FANO vel PHANO., agreeable to the same. Item, ii. copes of red clothe of tyssue, orphrysed with needle worke, and a running orphrise of green clothe tyssue. Item, ii. copes of yellowe baudkyn, woven with scallopshells, orphrised with grene clothe of tyssue. Item, a suite of vestmentes of blewe velvette, orprised with needle worke, with albes stoles and fannels agreeable to the same. Item, a suite of vestmentes of red clothe of bawdkyn, orphrised with needle-worke, with albes, stoles, and fannells, agreeable to the same. Item, a suite of vestmentes of red bawdkyn, woven with birds. orphrised with blewe bawdkyn, with albes, stoles, and fannels, agreeable to the same. Item, a cope of blewe baudkyn, woven with sonnes [suns], orphrised with needle worke. Item, a cope of red bawdkyn woven with birdes of gold, orphrised with needle-worke. Item, a cope of whyte damaske with flowers of gold, orphrised with needleworke. Item, a vestment of white damaske orphrised with needle worke, with an albe, stole, and fannell,

to the same. Item, a vestmente of blacke velvette for a masse of requiemIn marg. "Note the albe, stole, and fannel to the blacke vestmente is lacking, which shall be sent.". Item, a vestment of blewe grogreynI know not exactly the meaning of this word, but it is used in the INVENTORY of the goods of Curtess bishop of Chichester, who died in 1587. "One silk grograine gowne faced with velvet.—Another grograine gowne, &c." Strype, ANN. REF. vol. i. B. i. ch. 26. pag. 332. edit. 1728. I suppose it to be from the French gros grain, and that grogram is its corruption. powdered with crownes of needleworke, with albe, &c. Item, a vestmene of whyte satten of Brydges [Bruges], with a grene crosse of satten of Brydge, powdered with flowers, with albe, &c. Item, a vestment of whyte . . . . . for Lent, with an albe, &c. Item a vestmente of whyte fustion for Lent having a crosse of reade [red] fustion, with an albe, &c. Item, ii. alter-clothes for the high alter; that is to say, i. for the upper parte, and i. for the nether part, of checker bawdkyn, painedStriped or edged. In the romance of IWAIN AND GAWAYN (MSS. Cott. GALB. E. xi.) we have this apposite passage."And with a mantell sche me clad. It was of purpur fayre and fyne. And the pane of riche ermine." That is, The border was of ermine. with crymson velvette, powdered with flowers and angels of gold, Item, ii. like alter-clothes for the said alter of blewe bawdkyn, pained with red velvette woven with bookes of golde. Item ii. like alter-clothes, for the said alter, of whyte satten of Brydges, powdered with birdes of gold. Item, ii. nether alter-clothes

for the alters in the Body of the chappell, of read bawdekyn woven with flowers and castles of gold, and payned with white damaske, and greeneBruges. brydge-satten powdered with droppes of velvette, and Jesus of gold. Item, the upper and nether clothe for the SepulchreThe following appointment occurs in the Founder's ADDITAMENTUM before-cited. fol. ult. "Volo, ut duodecim denarii annuatim concedantur, ad SEPULCRUM DOMINI in sacello collegii mei, in die Parasceves et VIGILIA PASCHAE, pernoctantibus et vigilantibus, ad laborum suorum ea in re compensationem." See an account of a pompous SEPULCHRE of this sort made for Radcliffe-church at Bristol, in 1470, in Walpole's ANECD. PAINT. vol. i. pag. 45. edit. i.—Rot. Comp. Coll. Wint. 1395. MS. "Et in i. carpentario conducto per ii. dies ad faciendam domum SEPULCRI in choro, &c. vjd.", pained with whyte and red brydge-satten. Item, a herse clothe of blacke fustion of Naples powdered with images, birdes, and rolles of needle-worke, with a crosse of whyte fustion, and the dove in the myddest, of needle-worke. Item, a clothe for the Sacrament of whyte taffata edged with bone worke and tassels of gold. Item, a corporas caise [case] of blewe cloth of golde, and reade velvette, with Jesus on it of stole-worke of golde wherein is also a fyne corporas. Item, i. other corporas case of reade bawdkyn wherein is also a fyne corporas. Item, ii. other corporas cases, whereof the one is of taffata, and other of whyte fustion, in every of which cases is also a fyne corporas. Item a clothe of canvasse to lye uppon the high alter iii. yerdes long. Item, ii. lynnen clothes to lay uppon

the altars in the Bodie of the chappell, cont. iii. elles and a quarter the pece. Item, iiii. Towelles for the High altar, and iiii. towelles for the nether altars"Quatuordecim Tualliae de panno lineo pro summo altari, &c.—Quinque parvae Tualliae pro manibus tergendis." [Coll. Windes.] Dugd. Mon. iii. Eccl. Coll. p. 85. col. 2. "Duo Abstersoria de panno lineo ad extergendum digitos post perfusionem in majori altari." Dugd. Append. Hist. Eccl. S. Paul. p. 217.—Rot. Comp. Coll. Winton. MS. 1395. "Et in xi ulnis de panno de Westnale emptis per dictum Thesaurarium [de Wolvesey] et liberatis collegio xix die Marcii pro tuelli altarium capellae, vs. iijd.". Item, ii. cusshens, of redde sylke for the chappel woven with flowers of golde. Item, a great waynscot coffer to put in all the ornaments aforesaid. ALL which parcells, &c. IN witness, whereof, &c.Moreover, the within named president, fellowes, and scholers, have receaved of the said sir Thomas Pope, their founder, ii. processionalls, and a gospell boke.NUMB. XVII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus missis per dominum Fundatorem, tam ad ornatum Sacelli quam Aulae, Jan. xx. 1577Registr. ut supr. fol. 17. 2..FFIRSTE, a ffayre cope of rede sylke lyned with taffata, and having images of gold wrought upon the same, the orphises [orphreis] being needleworke, and having a narrowe cape. Item, i. vestment of red velvette, with a Crosse of gold of stoleworke, and ymbrawdered with floure de luces, angels, and spred eagles of gold, with stole, and ffannell of blacke velvette, with an albe; belonginge to a vestment of blacke velvett, which is mentioned in the ffirst indenture made by the colledge, declaringe the receyte of the ffirst church-stuffe and playte, and the lacke of the said stole, fannel, and albe, noted in the margent of the saide indenture. Item, a vestment of blewe silke lyned with taffata, and woven with burdes and flowers of Colen [ColognOr, Colonia in Italy.] gold, with stole, &c. Item, a rich clothe or canapye

to hange over the blessed sacrament on the altar made with cypersQ. Cyprus-lawn. "Quinque aurifrygia, quorum tria sunt OPERE CYPRENSI nobilissimo, et unum est de opere Anglicano." Lib. Anniv. BASILIC. VATICAN. apud Rubeum in VIT. Bonifacii. viii. PP. p. 345. Also Carpentier's SUPPL. GL. Cang. tom. i. col. 391. "Unum pluviale de canceo rubeo cum aurifrixio de opere CYPRENSI."Milton's cyprus lawn, in IL PENSEROSO, is written cipres, in the first edition., and perled with golde, and frynged with sylver, being hemmede with a lace of silke and golde. Item, a faire canapye to cary over the blessed sacrament upon Corpus Christi daye, made of yalowe silke, velvet, and clothe of golde fryngede. Item, iiii. paynted staves to cary the said canapye uppon. Item, a ffaire corporas case of clothe of golde, and a fine lynen clothe within the same. Item, one other fair rich corporas case, with images of golde of bothe sydes, having a border about the same on both sydes, garnished with seed perle; on the one syde of which corporas case is our Lady and her sonne on horse-backe, and on the other syde our ladye and her sonne sittinge in a chaire, and a fyne lynnen clothe within the same. Item, one other corporas case of red silke and golde, with a fyne lynnen clotheIn marg. "The clothe promysed but not sent." within the same. Item, ii. faire quyshions of red silke, and flowers of golde wrought in the same, for the chappell. Item, a fair payr of OrgansIn the college-statutes the following clause occurs, "In die Veneris Officium de Nomine Jesu, in die Sabbati vero, de benedicta Virgine matre, cum cantu et organis solemniter septimanatim celebrari debere statuo." And in the same statute it is injoined. "Primas ac secundas vesperas, completoria, et matutinas et altas missas, ac processiones, devote ac distincte, cum cantu et nota, secundum consuetudinem et usum ecclesiae cathedralis Sarum, celebrent et cantent." Cap. xii. De Horis canonicis, Missis et aliis suffragiis dicendis, de mode in Choro sedendi. [See LIFE, p. 129.] The organ, mentioned in the text, was removed from the chapel, where it stood over the screen, into the bursary, about the year 1645. At length, under the administration of the presbyterians, it totally disappeared. After the parliamentary ORDINANCE made in the year 1644, it is extraordinary, that the magnificent organ on the north side of the chapel of saint John's college, Oxford, (which continued in use till the year 1768,) should have been suffered to remain: more especially, as it had been erected under the patronage of archbishop Laud; and as Cromwell's visitors had ordered sir William Paddy's donation for founding the choral service in that chapel, to be entirely applied to the augmentation of the President's salary. Original Register of the Visitation of univ. Oxon. A.D. 1648. MS. Archiv. Oxon. 4to. At New-college, the organ, given by William Port in the year 1458, which stood at the stall-end of the north side of the chir near the vestry, supported by wooden pillars, was destroyed in the year 1646. Wood's manuscript English History of the University of Oxford, vol. ii. fol. 245. The present organ in that chapel was erected in the year 1663. But the beautiful screen, on which it is placed, without any design of supporting an organ, was constructed in the year 1636: and in the same year, continues Wood, "the old stalls and deskes being pulled downe, those that are now standing were set up; and the wainscott adorned with curious painting, containing the figures of apostles, saints, &c." MS. ibid. fol. 246., which, with the carryage from

London to Oxford, cost xlA new organ was bought, in 1529, for the new, large and beautiful church of Holbech in Lincolnshire, for 3l. 6s. 8d. Stukeley's ITIN. CURIOS. p. 20. Gray, archdeacon of Berks, bequeathed 4l. in 1521, to St. Mary's church at Oxford, for a new payr of organs. Registr. univ. Oxon. Archiv. A. 166. fol. 66. According to Dugdale, an organ was purchased for the church of Sutton-Colfield in Warwickshire, by Vesey bishop of Exeter in the reign of Henry the eighth, at the cost of 14l. 2s. 8d. WARWICKSH. p. 667. In the year 1439, a new organ was made for the choir of Merton-college, by William Wootton, organ-builder at Oxford, for the sum of 28l. Ant. Wood's MERTON-PAPERS, MS. Bibl. Bodl. [Cod. BALLARD.] Whethamstede abbot of Saint Alban's, about the year 1450, gave to his church a pair of organs; for which, and their erection, he expended fifty pounds. No organ in any monastery of England was comparable to this instrument, for its tone and workmanship. CHRON. WHETHAMST. per Hearne, vol. ii. p. 539. About the year 1476, Thomas Wyrcester, abbot of Hyde near Winchester, gave eight marcs and a horse, to purchase an organ for his church. "Octo marcas et unum equum bonum pro novis organis musicalibus." MSS. ARCHIV. WOLVES. apud Winton.. Item, a depe bayson of puter to stand in the bodye of the chappel instede

of a fonte. Item, a faire staffe to carry the best crosse withall, covered and garnished with copper and gilt. Item, a shipp of puter to putt in frankenfence. Item, a paire of crewettes of pewter. Item, a pax of everie [ivory]. Item ii. faire bell candlestickes of latten, to sett tallow candles in upon the altar. Item, iii. Antiphoners of parchmente, bought by Mr. Parret for the queere. Item, ii. processionalls and a gospell-boke, which were conteyned in the backside of the said first indenture made by the colledge for receipt of the first plate and ornamentes of the churche. Item, ii. altar clothes, the one for the upper parte, and the other for the nether parte

of the altar, paned with red clothe of tyssue and purple-velvett, rychlie imbrowdered with angels and skitchins [escutcheons] of the passion. Item, a deskeclothe paynede with bawdkyn of sundry collers and edgede with whyte. Item, a cope of blacke silke with stripes of golde, having a rich orphes.Item, a stondinge cup of silver gilt, with a cover graven with the pommegranet and a sheiff of arrowes, poz. xxxiii. oz. Item, ii, gilte saltes without a cover, poz xxxix. oz. iii. quarters. Item, iii. playne drynkin potts of silver gilt, whereof one hath a cover, poz. xxxi. oz, iii. quarters. Item, ii. crewettes of silver gilt, poz. ix. oz. Item, a holie-water stoppe and a sprinkell of silver, parcell gilt, poz. xviii. oz. iii. quarters. Item, a sacringe bell of silver gilte, poz. v. oz. quarter. Item, a pax of silver gilt, with a crucifix and Mary and John, poz. xvi. oz. iii. quarters. Item, ii. pair of silver sensers, parcell gilt, poz. lxx, oz. Item. a ship of silver with a lyttell spone for frankensensA species of Censer. See Dugd. Mon. iii. 276. 311. 294. Ibid. Eccl. Coll. 84., parcell gilt, poz. xvii. oz. di. Item, ii. chappell baysens of silver, parcell gilte, poz. xxxvii. oz. di. Item, a ffaire crosse of silver and gilte with Marye and John, garnyshede with crystall and stones, with a foote of silver and gilt to the same, weinge together, besydes the garnyshing of crystall and stones, xxiiii. l. v. oz. Item, ii. candlestickes of silver parcell gilte, poz. xxxi. oz. iii. quarters. All whiche parcells, &c. In witnesse whereoff, &c.Added in the register, ad calc. instrumenti.Item, receved from the Founder, iii. Marche, a baner of grene sylke, wrapped in grene bokram, with ii. knoppes gylted for the same.—Item, receeived the second day of Aprile, an image of Christes resurrection, with a case for the same having locke and kaye. Item, receved from our said founder the vi. daye of Aprile, a deske-clothe of dyversecoloured sylke.NUMB. XVIII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus, missis per dominum Fundatorem ad collegium tertia vice. April. 12, 1557Registr. fol. 10..FFIRST, two tunicles for a diacon and sub diacon of white satten with flowres of gold, with albes, stoles and parrys to the same to matche with the vestment of white damaske—[before received.] Item, a banner clothe for the Crosse, of grene sarcenett; on the one side whereoff is paynted the Trinitie, and on the other syde our Ladye. Item, a crucifix of woodde, paynted, with the foure evangelistes, to set at the Entry of the QueereChoir. in the saide college. Item, one image of woode of the resurrectyon paynted, to sett upon the altar at Easter; and a box, lyned with cotten with a locke and kaye to putt the same image in. Item, ii. bookes of parchment lymned with gold; the one of which, beinge a gospellar, is covered on the one syde with sylver, and havinge a crucifix on the same copper

and gilte: And the other boke, being a pistolerEpistoler. For the Epistle., is lykewise covered on the one syde with sylver, having upon the same an image of St. Paule being sylver and gilte. Item, a faire cope of clothe of golde, with an orphreseThat is an embroidered edging. From AURIFRASIUM, corrupted from AURIFRISIUM, properly perhaps AURIPHRIGIUM. Fr. Orfray. Hence the Italian fregiato d' oro, that is, as our elder poets express the phrase, fretted with gold. Ariosto has, "D' ORO FREGIATA l' armatura," ORL. FUR. xxv. 97. And, "Ricche di gioie, e ben FREGIATA D' ORO," Ibid. xxxviii. 78. Menage supposes AURIPHRYGIUM to be "Phrygian work or embroidery in gold." It is certain that PHRYGIUM is used simply and substantively for this sort of ornament in a robe. "Obtulit S. Benedicto planetam [a Cope] aureis PHRYGIIS, mensium 12 signa infra habentibus, ornatam." Leo Ostiens. CHRON. CAS. Lib. ii. c. 24. In Chaucer's DREME of CHAUCER, PHRYGIUS is written FREGIUS, v. 1070. Some difficulty is thrown on this specious etymology by the Anglosaxon verb , to adorn. of clothe of sylver, and a running orphrese embrodered. Item, a vestment and ii. tunicles of clothe of sylver, having orphreses of clothe of golde, and a running orphrese embrodered, as the cope hath, with faire fyne new albes, stoles, phannells, and gyrdles, for the same, with iii. bags of lynen clothe to put the same in. Item, a faire canapie of blue clothe of gold, paned with riche redde tynsell, with rhredes of golde and a faire fringe of sylke, and the inside of the valence lyned with satten of Bridges. Item, a hearse-clothe of the same blue clothe of golde and red tynsell frynged with sylke. Item, six albes furnished for Boyes to

carye candlestickes and sensors, whareof two of them be hymmedeHemmed. with clothe of golde, of the same clothe of gold that the cope before remembered is of. Item, ii. tunicles of white Brydges saten, orphresed with grene Brydges saten, for such to weare as shall carye the crosse and holie-water stoppe. Item, ii. faire copes of tyssue, with fair orpheses of nedleworke. Item, a cope of blewe baudkin with flowres of golde, and with an orphrese of yelowe tyssue, havinge a running orphese of red velvet. Item, another faire cope of white damaske with angells and arch-angells of gold, havinge a faire orphese of needle worke. Item a faire vestment and two tunicles belonging to the same, of the same redde clothe of tyssue that the ii copes before remembered are of, having orpheses of needleworke and armes upon the same, and having new albes, stoles, and parrys belonging to the same. Item, a deske-clothe made of olde churche stuffe of sundry sortes. Item, a quission to lay the crosse on in the Sepulchre, made of iiii. scochyns wherein armes are wrought. Item, a monstransA box for relics, or the Sacrament. of sylver gilt, poz. xxi. oz. ALL which parcells of plate, books, and ornaments, &c. In witnesse, &c.Ad calc. instrumenti, in Registr.Item, Receyved from our founder, in the month of June, 1558, these bookes followinge. In primis, Josephus Graece. One booke [volume] of St. Beede's works. Another, intitled Sanctiones Ecclesiasticae.

One other of St. Justines workes the martir. And one Greeke Psalter covered with clothe of golde. Item syx processionalls printed.—Item, two clothes of payned velvett for the sepulcher. Item, two clothes of saten Brydges for the lowe alters. Item, eight sconsys. Item, a bible in Englishe, with a Psalter, and a . . . . booke. Item ii books of common prayerMass-book. in lattenSee Numb. XIX..NUMB. XIX. Bishop Horne's Letter to Trinity college concerning the Removal of superstitious ornaments from the chapelRegistr. fol. 138. b.. Dat. 1570Soon after the Act of Uniformity had been promulged in 1558, in the first year of queen Elisabeth, instead of removing the fopperies of the antient worship, or at least suffering them gradually to wear away by time and neglect, this society appears to have spared no expence to retain and renew these solemn toys. This may be gathered from the following articles in Comp. Burss. 1560,—1."Sol. pro quatuor ulnis panni vocati Fetwich pro altaribus, ijs. vijd. ob.—Sol. pro clavis exiguis ad eadem pendilia [curtains] affigenda, ijd.—Sol. pro longis lathes quae inserviebant circa pendilia altarium, xxijd.—Sol. pro ulna canabei panni ex qua fiebant pendilia supra ostium CRUCIFIXORII, xjd. ob." The last article is for a curtain to hang over the little folding-doors which inclosed the CRUCIFIX standing on the principal altar..To the worshipfull my loving friends the president and fellowes of Trynitie college in Oxford.AFTER my hartie commendations: Whereas I am informed that certaine monuments

tending to idolatrie and popish or devills service, as Crosses, Censares, and such lyke fylthie stuffe used in the idolatrous temple, more meter for the same than for the house of god, remaynethe in your college as yet undefaced; I am moved thereby to judge great want of good will in some of you, and no less neglygence in other some, as in beinge so remisse to performe your duties towards god, and obedience unto the prince. Wherefore I can do no lesse, as in respecte of my Office and Care I have of you, but verie earnestlie forthwith, uppon the receite hereof, will you to deface all manner suche trashe, as in the church of Christe is so noysome and unseemlie; and to convert the matter thereof to the godlie use, profett, and behoofe of your house. And further to have in mynde the motion made by the graunde commissionersNotwithstanding this Injunction, I find Bishop Horne visiting the college, by his commissary, G. Acworth, L.L.D. four years before, Nov. 19, 1566, who finds "Nihil reformatione dignum." Registr. Horne, fol. 52.I shall give some other instances of his reforming genius, from his said Register, penes Officiar. Episc. Winton.INJUNCTIONS, among others, At a Visitation of the Cathedral of Winchester, Oct. 2, 1571. Reg. ut supr. fol. 83."Item, That the roode loft in the bodye of churche be mured upp, and some parcell of scriptur be written ther. Item, That the tabernacles of images now standing voyde in the bodye of the churche may be taken away, or filled upp, and the places made plane. Item, That all images of the Trinitye in the glasse windows, or other places of the churche, be putt oute and extinguished, together with the stone crosse in the churche-yarde. Item, That the inventorye of all the churche stuffe, as copes, vestiments, albes, chalices, pixes, service books, and such other whatsoever, be brought and exhibited to the ordinarye within two monthes next after, with a certificate of all the images that wer in the churche."At a Visitation of Winchester College, Oct. 2. 1571. fol. 88. seqq. "Item, That the organs be no more used in servycetyme, and the stipende for the orgayne-player, and that which was allowed to a chapplen to say masse in the chappell in the cloyster, shalbe hereafter torned to some other godlye use and necessarye purpose in the colledge chappell. Item, The prayers which the choristers use dailye to saye in lattyn in fromonsFromond's. chappell, shallbe no mor used, but instead thereof some other prayers, or psalmodie. Item, That for the sermons aforesaid, to be preached by the warden and fellowes, there be a decent pulpit made removeable, and to be sett upp by the greces beneath the communion-table for the sermon tyme; and that the rood-lofte be taken down to a competent height for hindering the hearers. Item, That the holie communion shall be ministered in the said colledge, withoute any cope having images or pictures."At a Visitation of New college in Oxford, Aug. 29, 1567. fol. 65. "Item, Ut tabulata inter chorum capellae et navem ejusdem amoveantur et prosternantur, usque ad altitudinem sedilium ejusdem chori, et ut omnes et singulae imagines ibidem olim stantes igni committantur. Item, Ut amotis tegminibus orientalis partis chori ejusdem capelle, parietes ibidem obumbrentur plane, dealbentur, et sententie sacre scripture ibidem scribantur.—Neque socii, scholares, aut ministri chori, se convertant in divinis, more papistico, ad orientem, cum cantatur Gloria Patri." Against the eastern wall of this magnificent chapel over the altar, the pride of Gothic architecture was richly displayed in imagery, niches, pinnacles, groupes of tracery, and other sumptuous ornaments of curious workmanship. These were destroyed or defaced by this injunction of bishop Horne; who not only removed the statutes, but broke or filled up the niches, and reduced the whole, which must have formed a beautiful and characteristical termination of the visto from the choir-door, to a plain superficies of plaister and whitewash. This wall, or screen, is thus described by the founder in the statutes of the college. STATUT. COLL. Nov. Rubr. lxiii. "Item, quia in intermedio capitali sive transversali muro capelle nostri collegii supradicti, ubi quidam murus lapideus inter ipsam capellam et aulam ipsius collegii mediare noscitur ac eciam separare; ymago sanctissime ac individue Trinitatis, patibulum sancte crucis, cum ymagine crucifixi, beate Marie virginis, sanctorumqu plurium aliorum ymagines, sculpture, fenestre vitree, ac picture varie, monnullaque alia opera sumptuosa, ad dei laudem gloriam et honorem ipsiusque matris predicte, subtiliter fabricata, variisque coloribus perornata, devotissime situantur, ac multipharie collocantur, &c." In the year 1695, in refitting the altar and its environs, it was found that much of this antient Gothic workmanship still remained under the surface of the wall, covered with a thick coat of cement or plaister, in tolerable preservation. See LIFE of A. Wood. vol. ii. p. 392. edit. 1772.To return to Horne. That he might contribute all the assistance in his power, towards purging away the dregs of popery, I find him while bishop of Winchester, very frequently visiting, his cathedral, Winchester college, New college, Magdalene, Corpus Christi, and Trinity, colleges, in Oxford; but St. John's not once. Ex Registr. Horne, praedict. He began this business the year after his entrance into the bishoprick. At Trinity college he visited in person, 24 Sept. 1561, when I find expended upon him in dinner, wine, and gloves, ivl. ixs. xd. Afterwards the following notices occur.Comp. Burss. Coll. Trin. 1565.—6. "Alloc. in epulis datis commissario episcopi Winton. visitanti collegium, die Sept. [Nov.] 19, 1566. xls.Comp. 1575.—6. "Sol. 6. Jul. 1576. Apparatori D. Episcopi Wynton. adferenti literas citatorias. vs."Sol. pro i Pari chirothecarum dato Dom. Episc. Winton. ivs."Allocat. in epulis datis Dom. Episcopo Winton, visitanti collegium, sec. die Augusti, A.D. 1576. vjl. ijs. ij d. qu.Horne was a learned man, but a zealous and active puritan. While Dean of Durham, in the reign of Edward vi. he demolished many very elegant and very harmless monuments of ancient art, in that noble cathedral. The author of a curious book, entitled Ancient Rites of the Church of Durham, Lond. 1672. p. 122. written by one who lived while the monastery subsisted, tells us, that he destroyed the history of St. Cuthbert beautifully painted in glass throughout the cloyster-windows. This havock, he adds, was made by dean Horne, "who could never abide any ancient monuments, acts, or deeds.". If anie do make doubt of your

statutes, in that parte, as some more obstinate than zealous may doe; I do signifye unto you, That I

have perused the statutes, and do fynde, that, the same well considered, and the words thereof trulie

interpreted, you may lawfullie withoute infringinge of any parte thereof, deface the same abuses, and receave the commoditie that may be had thereof, to thuse of your house. So trustinge to hear shortlie that the same shall be accomplished effectualie, I wishe to you all the encrease of the grace of godes holie spirite.From Waltham,the xixth day of July, 1570.Your loving friende, ROBERT [HORNE] WINTONSee the next Article..NUMB. XX. Letter from Queen Elizabeth's Commissioners relating to the Business of the last-mentioned Letter, dat. 1570Ibid. fol. 139..To the president, fellowes, and scollers, of Trynitie college, Oxford.WE will and commaunde you, by vertue of the Quenes majesties commission to us directed, that before the xiith daye of Julye next ensuenge the date hereof, you cause to be defaced all the church Plate and church Stuffe, belonging to your colledge; in such sorte, that it never maye be used agayne, as it hath bin. Otherwise, as to you shall seeme best, to the most profett and behoffe of your said colledge. And that you so doe it, as either one of her Majesties commissioners may se it; or you the president, by your othe, testifie to us, or our colleagues, to be doen, according to the tenour herof, the next court daye after the daye abovementioned. Returnyng then agayne this our Precept

with you. Whereof fayle you not, as you will answer to the contrarie at your perrelHowever, a few months before, they demolished the stonealtars in the chapel, and placed in their stead, a communiontable, &c. as appears by the following entries.Comp. Burss. 1569.—70. "Sol. lapicidinis per duos dies in" sacello laborantibus. ivs. ivd."Sol. 10. feb. pro communionis mensa et pluteis in sacello, xjs.Soon afterwards, the Metrical psalms, after the plan of Geneva, growing fashionable, I find the first mention of the following article.Comp 1575.—6. "Expos. a decano pro sex libris psalmorum in usum sacelli. xijs.". This xxviii. June, 1570. Thomas Cooper, L. Humfrie, H. Westphalinge, W. ColeThe queen's commissioners for abolishing popish superstition in the university of Oxford. They sate in the divinity chapel, in Christ-church cathedral. Cooper was dean of Gloucester, afterwards bishop of Winchester. Humphrey was president of Magdalene. Westphalinge was canon of Christ-church, afterwards bishop of Hereford. Cole was president of C. C. C. Oxon. See Wood Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 291. Godwyn informs us, that Westphalinge was a person of such consummate gravity, that during a familiar acquaintance with him for many years, he never once saw him laugh.—"Nunquam in risum viderim solutum." De Praesul. ed. 1616. pag. 546. ed. 4to. His arms are elegantly painted in the great window of the Chapter-house at Christ-church, with an Inscription, and the date 1601..NUMB. XXI. Compositio quaedam Collegiorum, Coll. Magd. et Coll. Trin. Oxon. Dat. Feb. 26, 1558In Thesauriar. Coll. Trin. et Registr. prim. fol. 22. b. Et Muniment. Coll. Magd..OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus, ad quos hoc praesens scriptum indentatum pervenerit: Nos Thomas Coveney, praesidens collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae in universitate Oxon. et scholares ejusdem collegii, salutem in domino sempiternam. Cum AliciaDaughter of Robert Gardiner, mentioned below, of Sunningwell, Berkshire, and Alice Orpewood. See p. 327. PARRET, nuper de parochia sancti Petri in oriente Oxon. vidua, ac bonae memoriae matrona, ejusqueDat. fuit testamentum 21 Mar. 1556. Probat. 4 Jul. 1556. Offic. Testam. Oxon. testamenti unicus executor SIMON PARRETIn the British Museum are manuscript letters of one Simon Parrett, certainly not the same, dat. Oxon. 1582. concerning a new edition of Fox's Book of Martyrs, written to Fox. MSS. Harl. 416., generosus, nuper praedicti collegii socius, ob magnae devotionis fervorem, et affectionem in praefatum

collegium, inter se dederint, et manibus suis propriis tradiderint, partim Owino Oglethorpe nuper praesidenti collegii praedicti, et scholaribus ejusdem collegii, partim nobis praefato Thomae Coveney nunc praesidenti dicti collegii, et scholaribus ejusdem collegii, centum viginti et quatuor libras bonae ac legalis monetae Angliae, ad emendum et perquirendum terras et redditus ad verum annuum valorem sex librarum, ultra omnes reprisas, quas vocant, habend. et tenend. nobis praefatis praesidenti et scholaribus collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae in universitate Oxon. et successoribus nostris, in perpetuum; ad effectus quosdam pios infra-scriptos: praecipue vero, pro perpetuis duabus Exhibitionibus in dicto collegio fundandis, et aliis non minus piis, quam necessariis, sustentationibus pauperum scholarium studentium in dicto collegio. Nos igitur, praefati praefidens et scholares, tam insigni pietate moti, rursus nec ferentes tam pium desiderium praefatorum ALICIAE et SIMONIS effectu spoliari, nec defunctam sua extrema voluntate fraudari, sed mandatum ejus ad effectum perducere conantes; praefatam summam, vel saltem majorem ejus partem, quadruplo erogavimus in emptionem terrarum, nuper de Roberto Radborne de Stanlake in com. Oxon. perquisitarum, et reliquam summam, prout opportunitas se offeret, in similes usus applicabimus. Quos quidem redditus sex librarum per annum, nos praefati praesidens et scholares promittimus, et per praesentes obligamus nos et successores nostros, ad specialem requisitionem praefati SIMONIS PARRET, Praesidenti Sociis et Schclaribus Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis inuniversitate Oxon. ex fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, quod nos et successores nostri deinceps perpetuis futuris temporibus, deo volente, colligemus, exponemus, et solvemus, vel solvi faciemus, per manus bursariorum dicti collegii, secundum voluntatem praedictae ALICIAE, ad hunc qui sequitur modum. IN PRIMIS, promittimus, et obligamus nos et successores nostros, quod deinceps in perpetuum erit unus sociorum dict collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae in universitate Oxon. sacris initiatus, viz. presbiter bonae conversationis integraeque famae, qui orabit pro animabus ROBERTI PARRET et ALICIAE uxoris ejus, SIMONIS PARRET et ELISABETHAE uxoris ejus, Johannis Kele et Edmundi Kele, Roberti Gardenar et Aliciae uxoris ejus, et pro animabus omnium Fidelium defunctorum, bis singulis hebdomadis, cum celebraverit Missam. Qui quidem presbiter recipiet in sine cujuslibet anni termini decem solidos, de praedictis sex libris; viz. in toto per annum, et sic de anno in annum, quadraginta solidos. Cujus electio ac praefectio deinceps erit penes praesidentem praedicti collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae pro tempore existentem, si domi fuerit, vel si intra unum mensem ad dictum collegium redierit post recessum, decessum, obitum, resignationem, vel deprivationem, praedicti socii, sic ad hanc electionem admissi. Quod si praesidens ultra mensem abfuerit a praedicto collegio, tum penes vice-praesidentem erit novum sufficere presbiterum in vacantis locum. Tenebiturque admittendus ad hanc exibitionem, eodem die, aut saltem intra tres dies immediate sequentes ejus admissionem, hanc COMPOSITIONEM legere. INSUPER, nos praefati praesidens

et scholares obligamus nos et successores nostros ad celebrandas Exequias dominica secunda post festum Paschatis quo die obiit praefatus ROBERTUS PARRET, et missam die sequenti singulis annis in perpetuum, pro animabus supranominatorum, cum expressione nominum eorum. Et ad distribuendos viginti solidos inter praesidentem dicti collegii et socios ejusdem, qui interfuerint exequiis et missae praedictis solummodo: nisi forte praesidens, aut sociorum aliquis abfuerit in negotiis collegii; in quo casu nolumus eorum aliquem sua fraudari portione. Necnon ad solvendum Choristis dicti collegii, vel eorum locum tenentibus, quinque solidos et quatuor denarios; et Praeceptori eorum sexdecim denarios, singulis annis in perpetum. Et ulterius promittimus, quod eodem die quo celebrabitur Missa pro animabus supranominatorum, tresdecim solidi et quatuor denarii insumentur in uberiorem refectionem praesidentis et scholarium praedictorum, prout fieri consuevit in exequiis aliorum Benefactorum dicti collegii. Decernimus etiam, ut qui admissus sit ad hanc exhibitionem, singulis annis, eodem die celebrabit Missam, et vocabitur Capellanus ALICIAE PARRET. Item, quod communi campanario, more Oxoniae solito, pro animabus praedictorum publice proclamanti, in die dictarum Exequiarum, annuatim dabuntur quatuor denarii, pro labore ejus. Praeterea, nos praefati praesidens et scholares obligamus nos et successores nostros, per praesentes, quod deinceps singulis annis ad terminum viginti annorum, primo die Maii, quo die obiit praefata ALICIA, nos praefati praesidens et scholares, et successores nostri, deliberabimus

viginti solidos capellano sic electo; ut is, et unus Gardianorum ecclesiae sancti Petri in oriente Oxon. singulis annis, in exequiis celebrandis in parochia praedicta sancti Petri pro animabus praedictorum, juxta eorum discretionem, singulis annis, durante termino praedicto, distribuant et erogent in pios usus: viz. in necessarios sumptus Exequiarum et Missae, et in sustentationem Indigentium commorantium in dicta parochia sancti Petri. Et ulterius decernimus, quod elapsis viginti annis, et debitis factis distributionibus in parochia praedicta, quod extunc nos praefati praesidens et scholares, singulis annis imperpetuum, deliberabimus, per manus bursariorum praedicti collegii, viginti solidos alicui socio dicti collegii, vel scholari, eligendo et nominando, more capellani praedicti, ad orandum pro animabus praedictorum. Praeterea ordinavimus, quod residuum sex librarum praedictarum remaneat ad opus et usum dicti collegii imperpetuum. POSTREMO, ut COMPOSITIO et haec praesens Ordinatio firma sit et perpetua, nullisque injuriis antiquanda, nos praefati praesidens et scholares concedimus per praesentes, pro nobis et successoribus nostris imperpetuum; quod si per nos praefatum praesidentem et scholares, vel successores nostros, steterit, quo minus haec Ordinatio non plenarie fuerit satisfacta, sed incuria vel culpa nostra aut exhibitiones non solvantur, vel defunctis Justa non persolvantur, vel distributiones omittantur; quod tunc, quoties id contigerit, bene licebit Praesidenti Sociis et Scholaribus Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, imperpetuum, in omnes terras

nostras, nuper perquisitas de praefato Roberto Radborne in Stanlake praedicta, intrare et distringere, districtionesque sic captas licite asportare, abducere, effugare, et penes se retinere, ac ad eorum usum recipere et habere, ad tantum valorem quanti valoris fuerit onus sive exhibitio dicti socii vacantis supra tempus limitatum, aut distributio ulla, ut superius constituitur, omissa. IN CUJUS rei testimonium, uni parti hujus scripti indentati penes nos praefatos praesidentem et scholares collegii B. Matiae Magdalenae in universitate Oxon et successores nostros remanenti, Praesidens Socii et Scholares Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, Sigillum suum commune apposuerunt; et alteri parti hujus scripti indentati, penes praefatos Praesidentem Socios et Scholares Collegii sanctae et individuae Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex fundatione THOMAE POPE militis, et successores eorum, remanenti, nos praefati praesidens et scholares collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae Oxon. Sigillum nostrum commune apposuimus. DATUM xxvi. die februarii, anno regni serenissimae nostrae principis Elisabethae, dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Reginae, fidei defensoris, etc. primoBy another instrument, mutually given as above, bearing date Sept. 1, 1579, this Composition, on account of the reformation of religion, was altered, as it is to this day observed by Magdalene college. In Registr. Coll. Trin. prim. fol. 40. Et in Munim. Coll Trin. et Magd. ut supr.—Wood is mistaken in saying, that this Alicia Parret was the wife of Simon, for she was his mother. Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 190. But he afterwards corrected the mistake, Athen. Oxon. i. fast. 23. col. 1. Vide Lee's MSS. Visitat. Oxfordsh. pp. 12, 13. In the altered Composition, where mention is made of the distributio in choristas, it is added, "Quia dictus Robertus Perott, al. Parret, pater dicti Simonis, fuit olim praeceptor choristarum in dicto collegio." He was an eminent musician for his time; and graduated in music at Oxford, before the year 1515. And dying April 21, 1550, aged 72, was buried in the church of St. Peter in the East at Oxford. The same Robert Perrot was a sharer of abbey-land, and bought Rewley abbey at Oxford on the dissolution. Wood, MSS. Cit. Oxf. No. 8491. Mus. Ashm. He also occurs receiver general of the archdeaconry of Buckingham, in 1534, Willis, Cath. Oxf. p. 119. He was also receiver of rents for Christ-church, Oxford, in the twenty-sixth year of Hen. viii. MSS. in Offic. Primit. He is mentioned, in lord Williams's Charter for founding Thame-school in Oxfordshire, dated 1574, to have been receiver of the rents for Littlemore Priry near Oxford. Compare LIFE, p. 117, 183. and Append. Numb. IX. in the notes. And p. 327. notes. Also Wood, FAST. Oxou. i. 69, 70. And Morton's Northamptonsh. p. 460.But a curious authentic manuscript has lately been communicated to me, containing various evidences and notices of the family of Perrot: the following extracts from which will confirm or correct what is here, or has been before in other parts of this work, either imperfectly or erroneously observed concerning the said family. viz. "fol. 5. b. Simon Parret is made n tary public, 22 May, 1546.—fol. 7. a. S. Parret is constituted registrar of Bucks, with a fee of five marks and a robe annually, 20 Jul. 1547.—fol. 3. a. S Parret, of Oxford, gentleman, is appointed steward of divers manors, to dame Elizabeth Pope, widow, 20 Jan. 1559.—fol. 6. b. He is made, by Edward the sixth, bailiff of the chantrylands within the county of Oxon, 2. Feb. 1550, with a fee of vl. vjs. viijd.—fol. 111. b. He, then aged xxxvi years, marries Elizabeth Love of Aynhoe, 28 Sept. 1550.—fol. 78. b. He sells his lease of the parsonage of Stoke-lyne to his brother in law Edward Love, 1561.—fol. 7. a. His son Simon comes to a court at Northleigh, co. Oxon. 1568.—fol. 111. a. He dies aged 71, 24 Sept. 1584, and is buried in St. Peter's church in the East at Oxford.—fol. 111. a. His wife Elizabeth, married at nineteen years of age, and by whom he has nineteen children, dies in 1572, and is buried in the said church—fol. 72. a. Robert Parret of Oxford esquire, [the musician] father of the first Simon, occurs in 1349.—fol. 12. a. Robert's will is dated 18 Apr. 1550, he being then of St. Peter's, Oxon. Therein he gives to his wife Alice his patent of 4 marcs annually from the king, ending with the life of G. Pigott. In the same he mentions his son Simon.—fol. 111. b. He dies 21 Apr. following, buried ibid.—fol. 13. a. The will of the said Alice is dated 21 Mar. 1556. Therein she mentions Elizabeth the wife of her son Simon, to whom she gives her best cassocke of clothe and sattin kyrtell. She dies [Alice] 2 Jul. 1558.—fol. 111. b. The same Alice, mother of the said Simon, daughter of Alice Orpewood, dying 1558, is buried in the said church.—fol. 37. a. Articles of marriage between Simon Parret [the younger] and Avis White, dated 1573."MS. fol. olim Gulielmi Perrot, armig. de Nerthleigh co. Oxon. Nunc penes me, ex dono R. V. Joannts Price, Probibl. Bodl.On the whole it appears, that Simon, fellow of Magdalene college, mentioned in this instrument, who married Elisabeth Love, was the person whose name occurs in papers and accounts (See LIFE, 183.) at the foundation of Trinity college, and who was the founder's agent.The manor of Northleigh aforesaid, being parcel of Nettley abbey in Hampshire, was granted to sir Thomas Pope and his heirs in the year 1545, by patent of Henry the eighth, anno regn. 36. Jul. 28. par. 8. From him it descended to his widow dame Elisabeth. Late in the reign of queen Elisabeth, it appears to have been vested in the descendants of Robert Parrot, or rather Perrot, abovementioned; whose son Simon, as we have seen, married Elisabeth Love, sir Thomas Pope's niece. Wood [Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. 23. ut supr.] is mistaken in saying, that the said Robert, the founder of this family in Oxfordshire, was the second son of George Perrot of Haroldston near Haverford west in Pembrokshire. It is proved from better authority, that he was born at Hacknes in the North riding of Yorkshire. MS. REGISTR. PARROT, ut supr. fol. 111. b. The family of Perrot lived at Northleigh, in their antient capital mansion house, till within these few years: but are now extinct, at least in the lineal succession. This estate was lately purchased by the duke of Marlborough.. [1558.—9]NUMB. XXII. Articles relating to certain Buildings and Utensils of Wroxton Priory in Oxfordshire, soon after the Dissolution. Dat. Aug. 16, 1537In Thesaur. Coll. Trin. praedict. Manu Dom. Thomae Pope. Where are several original instruments relating to this monastery. The most antient (not yet printed) are the two following, being nearly coeval with the foundation.I. "Universis sancte matris ecclesie filiis literas istas suspecturis vel audituris, magister MICHAEL BELET salutem in domino. Noverit universitas vestra, quod ego dedi et concessi domine abbatisse de GODESTHOUGH et monialibus ibidem deo servientibus, redditum quadraginta solidorum annuatim percipiendorum ad duos terminos: scil. viginti solidos ad octabas Pentecostes, et viginti ad octabas sancti Martini in hyeme. Quos predictos quadraginta solidos predicte moniales recipiant annuatim per manum prioris et canonicorum de WROKSTAN: quibus ego assignavi certum redditum in certo loco ad certum terminum in manerio meo de Sychestan. Ut sine omni impedimento possint eos percipere, et predictis monialibus reddere ad predictos terminos. Feci et predictos canonicos . . . . . . . . in periculo animarum suarum, et jurare, visis sacro-sanctis, quod sine dolo et fraude, omni impedimento et occasione cessante, solvant predictum redditum predictis monialibus: Ut autem haec mea donatio et concessio rata sit et firma, presens scriptum sigilli mei munimine roboravi. Hiis testibus, domino Rad. de sancto Amando, dom. Joh. de Bruchton, Alex. de Barton, Herveo Belet, Philip de Merula, Roberto de Sychestan. Rob. Parvo de Wroxton, Rob. de Cercedene, Nich de Wroxstan, et multis aliis." No date. cum sigill. Michael Belet founded the monastery early in the reign of Henry the third, about the year 1230.II. "Universis sancte matris ecclesie filiis literas istas visuris vel audituris. HUGO, Prior loci sancte Marie de WROKESTAN, et totus conventus qui ibidem serviunt deo et beate Marie, Salutem in domino. Noverit universitas vestra, quod nos obligamus nos et successores nostros in perpetuum, ad reddendum abbatisse et conventui de Godestowe annuatim quadraginta solidos argenti: scil. viginti solidos ad octabas sancti Martini in hyeme et viginti ad octab. Pentecostes. Quos quadraginta solidos patronus noster magister MICHAEL BELET assignavit nobis percipiendos in manerio suo de Sichestan: ubi ipse dedit nobis decem libratas terre. Sicut carta ejus testatur quam habemus. Et predictam obligationem multis modis secimus, quia juravimus in animas nostras quod predictam solutionem trium marcarum sine fraude et occasione, cessante omni contradictione et impedimento, faciemus ad predictos terminos: et sigillo nostro conventuali, quod huic scripto appensum est, confirmavimus: sub pena viginti solidorum pro quolibet defectu si contingat. Subjecimus etiam nos specialiter in hac parte jurisdictioni episcopi Lincoln, qui fuerit pro tempore, et similiter Archidiacono Oxon: ut illi duo, vel unus corum, possit nos sine omni contradictione compellere ad predictam solutionem, et ad penam si fuerit commissa. Et quicunque electus fuerit in priorem, jurabit quod fideliter hanc obligationem observabit. Hiis testibus, domino Nicolao rectore eclesie de Brocktun, dom. Bernardo vicario eclesie de Blokkesham, Jacobo de Hawntya tunc senescallo de Godestowe, Petro le Butelir de Mildecamb, Henr. de Lingitre, Rad. de Middletun, Will. de Heddindun, Henr. Meryet, et aliis." With the seal of the monastery; reversed with Saint Michael killing the dragon, and exergue ELEEMOSINA MICHAELIS BELET. Hugh was the second prior, and died before the year 1263.Our next original instrument, in point of antiquity, is a charter of Henry the ivth, granting free warren to Richard the prior, and his convent, in the manors of, Wroxton Oxfordshire, Thorpe Underwood Northamptonshire, and Siston Lincolnshire, "Hiis testibus, Th. Cantuar, H. Ebor, R. London, H. Wynton, Th. Dunolm, N. Bathon. et Wellens, Henr. principe Wall. filio nostro primogenito, carissimo consanguineo nostro, Edwardo Duce Ebor, Thoma Arundell, Ric. Warr. et Rad. Westmorl. comitibus, Thoma Beaufort cancellario nostro, Joh. Stanley senescallo hospicii nostri, et Mag. Joh. Prophete custode privati sigilli nostri, ac aliis. Dat. &c. decimo die octobr. ann reg. nostri duodecimo." A.D. 1410. with the broad seal in green wax.Here is also a charter of King John (printed by Dugdale) recited by inspeximus of Henry the fourth, ann. regn. 12. Octobr. 25. cum magn. sigill. [See Dugdal. Mon. ii. p. 326. 50.] This inspeximus recites a charter of Richard the second, who cites Edward the third, who cites Henry the third his father, who cites John his father. In this inspeximus Edward the third confirms the previous charters. "Hiis testibus, J. Archiep. Cant. W. Winton. episc. Thesaurar. nostro. Henr. com. Lancastr. Will. de Bohun. com. Northampt. Henr. de Percy, Thoma Wake de Lydell, Ric. Talebott senescallo hospicii nostri, et aliis. Dat. per manum nostram apud Westmon. 26. die Jan. ann. reg. 22." A.D. 1348.From these evidences, Willis's list of the priors of this monastery might be enlarged or authenticated, viz. HUGH occurs Prior, ut supr.—RICHARD, ut supr.—THOMAS GROVE, without date.—WILLIAM BRADDENHAM, A.D. 1490. Also Feb. 1, 5 Hen. vii.—RICHARD, 1504. For, Dec. 6, that year, T. Sidnall Capellanus de Wroxstan, by will, bequeaths to the said Richard and his convent many legacies: particularly his body to be buried in the conventual church before the great cross, and one pound of wax to burn before the cross in the parochial church of Wroxstan.—THOMAS SMITH, ann. 4. 7. 20. Hen. viii. He continued to the dissolution. See Willis MITR. ABB. ii. p. 188, 334. Concerning the abovementioned pension of forty shillings, paid by this monastery to Godstowe nunnery, I find the following original instrument, made in 1539. "This byll made the xxist day of October, the xxxth yere of the reign of our soueraign lord kyng Henry the viiith, witnesseth, that I Richard Gwent clerk, Deane of the Arches, have received of Thomas Pope esquier, thirtie poundes sterlyng, to the use of Dame Kateryn Bukley, Abbes of the monastery of Godstowe in the countie of Oxford, and the convent of the same, for the purches of a certayn annuytie of xls. by yere goyng out of certayne londes and tenements, &c. being parcell of the possessions of the late monastery of Wroxton in the said countie. In witnes whereof, I have subscrybed this byll with my own hond, the daye and yere above written, per Me RICHARD GWENT." In the Bursary of Trinity college Oxford. Where is also a Release for the same by the said abbess, with the beautiful seal of Godstowe abbey appendant. Catharine Bukley, or Bulkley, was the last abbess. See her Letter to lord Cromwell, complaining of the injustifiable proceedings of Dr. London, who came with a pretended commission for dissolving her convent. Burnet. REF. vol. iii. p. 130. REC. Num. 54. I also find [Thesaur. Coll. Trin.] a fragment of a letter from her, to sir Thomas Pope, desiring him to intercede with lord Cromwell on this business. See supr. LIFE, p. 184..HEreafter ensueth, aswell certeyne buildyngs belonging to the late Monastery of Wroxtone

sold by William Rayneseford, esquier, to Thomas Pope, esqyer, the xvith day of August, Ao. xxix.

[Hen. viii.] as also certeyne utensils belonging to the said monastery, being sold unto the said William

Raynesford by our Souveraigne lord the king's officers. That is to saye.First, the Wall of the Churche on the outside next the cloyster from the foote of the great window downwards.Item, The south ile joyning to the dorterDormitory., with ii. litell iles north est from that joyning to the same ile.Item, The dorter, with the roffe thereof.Item, The ffrater howse on both sides.IMPLEMENTS and UTENSILS.Item, The condyte as it is, with all the Lede thereto belonging.Item, ii. brasse Potts in the Kichyn to sythe mete in.Item, In the Brewhowse ii. grete ledes ffast sett in a frame. ii. small ledes sett in curbes. One greate troffe of lede sett in the grounde.All which implements before rehersed, I the said William Raynseford covenenteth and promyseth by thes presents at such time as I shall leve the ffarme which I nowe hold of the said Thomas Pope in Wroxton, to leve well and sufficyently repayred and mainteyned, and in as good case as they be now at the makyng of thes presents.THO. POPE.W. RAYNESFORDOf Great-Tew, in Oxfordshire..
Witnes at the making thereof John EdmondesHe occurs supr. See LIFE, p. 117, 326., gent. John Marshall. Richard HochynsonHe received a grant of lands with Sir T. Pope, pat. 30, Hen. viii. par. 8. supr. citat.. John Ridley. and John Menefye.NUMB. XXIII. Rate of the Purchase of the Rectory of GarsingtonIt was given by Richard ii. to the cell of the holy Trinity at Wallingford, Berks, ann. reg. 15. Feb. 9. A.D. 1392.—Anthony South prior, and the convent of the said cell, presented William Dayfote, bachelor in decrees, to the said rectory: saving a pension of 100s. due to themselves, and of 40s. due to S. Frideswides, at Oxford. Dat. in dom. capit. Jun. 4. 1479. E. Registr. Mon. S. Albani. MSS. Tanner. Bibl. Bodl. fol. This priory was annexed to S. Alban's abbey. It was granted to Cardinal Wolsey: but by forfeiture reverted to the crown., in Oxfordshire by Sir Thomas Pope, from Philip and Mary, under certain Considerations. Jan. 22, 1557. An ExtractE Lib. sec. Les Rates, 3, 4. Phil. Mar. British Mus. MSS. Harl. 607. fol. 7. b. ut supr..PHILIP and MARIE.By the King and Queen.—Forasmoche as Sir THOMAS POPE, knighte, as as we are credybly enformed, entendeth, if he might purchase the said parsonage, to gyve the same to the presydent fellows and scollers of Trinitie college in the universitie of Oxford, and to their successours

for ever, and at his chardge to erect an howse there, for the said president, fellows, and scollers, to repose them in, when any plage shall happen within the said universitie: We mindinge the furtherance of that good acte, and therwithal consideringe the Buyldinge of the same howse will be no lytle chardge to the said Sir Thomas, are pleased, etc. etc. Dat. 22 Jun. 1557.NUMB. XXIV.In the year 1577, when a mortal epidemical distemperIn the Statutes of Trinity college, given in 1556, the Founder allows a salary of vjl. xiijs. ivd. to the President, if removed and rendered incapable of serving his office, propter infirmitatem contagiosam, quae nunc videtur perpetua futura. Cap. xviii. This disease, I presume, was the Sweating Sickness.prevailed at Oxford, the College retired to the aforesaid house at GarsingtonE Registr. prim. Coll. Trin. Oxon. fol. 144. a. They likewise had before retired hither in the year 1570, or the next, the plague then raging at Oxford. Ex Comp. 1570,—1. In which plague six hundred persons died at Oxford. Wood, Hist. Antiqu. Univ. Oxon. i. 291. In this house they lived as at the college, and performed here, not only the collegiate, according to their own statutes, but all academical exercises necessary for their degrees, by permission of the university. In the Computus of the last-mentioned year, I find many curious particulars relating to their manner of living in this retirement, and to the general distress of the times. Among others, more than once, this article—"Sol. pro armis ad tuendam domum. viz. iii. black [iron] bylles. iiijs. vjd." Again, 1570.—1.—"Pro carta ad usum Bursariorum apud Garsington.—Pro epulis peregrinorum, pistoris aliorumque potum adferentium.—Pro equo Mag. Orpwoode euntis ad Abington ad parandum panem et potum pro collegio apud Garsington.—Pro expensis ejusdem apud Woodstocke et apud Kidlington variis temporibus circa panem et potum parandum pro iis qui remanent Oxoniae." It appears that they carried with them, from the college, to this place, proper necessaries and utensils, not only for their kitchen and buttery, but also for divine service. This was by the founder's directions; who moreover leaves this restriction, "Reliqua vero jocalia, et vasa argentea, tam sacelli quam aulae usui a me concessa, et alia ornamenta majoris pretii, in alium tutiorem locum infra universitatem Oxoniensem, curabunt perferenda." ADDITAM. ad statut. ut supr. fol. 104. During this secession, they are also directed to leave four persons in the college, "ad tutiorem collegii custodiam."Ibid. Concerning whom this article often occurs.Comp. 1570.—1. Pro antidoto contra pestem ad usum eorum qui domi remanserunt. vs.ivd.—Also, Datum N. pro labore suo in custodiendis Januis, et aliter, tempore pestis . . . . .And, Oct. 25. Sol. T. C. pro labore suo in proficiscendo hebdomadatim, pro decem hebdomadis, Woodstockiam, ad emenda obsonia pro iis qui domi remanent.— By which last article, as in some preceeding, it appears, that it was unsafe, or perhaps impossible, to purchase provisions at Oxford, in this calamitous season. Again, in the same year. "Pro expens. Mag. Orpewood et Chambrelen apud Woodstocke quando solvebant pecuniam pistori, et confirmabatur pactum cum eodem pro pane et potu pro Collegio [apud] Oxon." I find a great reparation of this house, 1596. Ex Comp. Anni. In the year 1603, the plague broke out again at Oxford, when they probably retired hither as before. But the chief notice that occurs, under that year, concerning it, is,Alloc. pro expens. tempore pestis, xiijl. iijs. ivd.In the year 1563, the plague raging at Oxford, before this house was finished, I find them retiring to Woodstock, where they hired houses for their accommodation. About which singular migration I have extracted these entries, from Comp. 1563-4.Sol. per totum tempus pestis pro praeservantibus mithridato et pillulis, diversis temporibus, xijs. xd.—Pro prandio insumpto in medicum nostrum, iijs. ivd—Pro stipendio ministri ecclesiae Woodestock, ijs.—Ad usum templi in Woodestock, xxd.—Pro expens. Greenwoodi [a fellow] peste mortui, ivs. ixd.—Pro expens. Bursariorum dum profecti sunt ad Woodestock ad Computum [generalem] faciendum . . . .—Sol. Woodstockii pro nocturnis vigiliis.—: relating to which occasion the following very singular instrument, dat. April 3, 1577, still remains.Instrument concerning the Recession of Trinity College from the University to Garsington aforesaid, in time of the Plague, 1577.TO all christian people to whom this present writinge shall come to be reade or hard. Arthur

Yeldarde president of the college of the holie and undivided Trinitie in the universitie of Oxforde,

of the ffoundation of Sir Thomas Pope, kt. and the fellows and scollers of the same colledge, send greeting in our lord god everlasting. Know yee, that wee the said president, fellowes and scollers, have appointed, constituted, and assigned, and do by these presents ap. cons. and ass. Thomas Blocksome, of Garsington in the Countye of Oxforde, butcher, to provide and bye for us soe many calfes, and the same to kill, as shall serve to our necessarye use for the sayde colledge and companye there, from the making hereof, unto the ffirst day of June next folowinge

the date hereof: prayinge all justices of peace, and and others the quenes majesties officers, quietlye to permitt the said Thomas Blocksome to carye, drive and passe throughe their libertyes, with all such Wares as he shall bye [buy] for such purpose before named. In witness whereoff, we the sayd president, fellowes, and scollers, have sett our common seale to these presents, the thirde daye of Aprill in the year of our soveraigne ladye Elizabeth, by the grace of God, quene of England, Ffraunce and Ireland, defenderesse of the faithe, the xixth. [1577.In an exhibitory bill, or schedule, of expences for their removal this year, as it seems, mention is made of carrying the Clck from the college-hall to Garsington-house. Also for carriage of surplices. viz. "Sol. operariis pro vectura linostoliorum Mag. Praesidis, Sociorum, et Scholarium, ad ecclesiam de Garsington." And the two following articles occur. "Pro lectis et hospitiis extra domum pro firmariis [farmers] aliisque in Computo Bursariorum et Ballivorum tento apud Garsington hoc anno."—"Pro luminibus in choro ecclesiae de Garsington, xvijs. ivd."]NUMB. XXV. Account of the first PRESIDENT, FELLOWS, and SCHOLARS, of Trinity College, Oxford, nominated by Sir THOMAS POPE, and admitted May 30, 1556. And of such others as were afterwards nominated by the same Authority.FIRST PRESIDENT.THOMAS SLYTHURSTE.BORN in Berkshire. He took the degree of A.B. at Oxford, Feb. 27, 1529Wood, Extracts from Regg. univ. Oxon. MSS. Mus. Ashm. E. 6.. He determined in the same termId. Ib. F. 14.. Made M.A. at Oxford, Feb. 25, 1533Id. Ib. E. 29. where it is not said that he was incorporated M.A. These extracts from the Univ. Regg. were made by Wood, after the publication of Hist. et Antiq. Univ. Oxon.. These are sufficient proofs that he was educated at Oxford; but in what college is uncertain.

Probably at Brazen-nose, or Magdalen. Antony Wood affirms, that he was incorporated Master of Arts from CambridgeHist. et Antiq. ii. 295. col. 1. But he retracts this assertion in his English MS. copy of that work; and owns that he had applied a reference, belonging to Yeldarde nextmentioned, to Slythurste.. But no such person occurs taking any degree in that universityIn Registr. Univ. Cant. And Dr. Richardson's MS. index to Cambridge graduates from 1500. See also the last note.. He was admitted at Oxford B.D. Nov. 21, 1543Wood Athen. Oxon, fast. 67. col. 1. [In Sion College library there is a quarto manuscript entitled FASTI CANTABRIGIENSES ab ann. 1500 ad ann. 1658.]. He was instituted Feb. 11, 1545, to the vicarage of Chalfont St. Peters, Bucks, at the presentation of Robert Drury, esquireMSS. Br. Willis, spectant. ad Co. Bucks, No. xii. part 2. pag. 12. fol. In Bibl. Bodl.; and on the decease of Robert HarrisonWillis, ibid. He is buried in the church, with this Inscription. "Of your charity pray for the sowl of Sir Robert Harison sum tyme vycar of thys church and of lyttyl Myssenden which decessid the xxv day of August, Ao. Dni. M• V• XLV. whose sowl God pardon.". On Feb. 21, 1554, he supplicated for the degree of D.D. et OxfordWood MSS. ut supr. E. 9. But no mention occurs of the supplication under the year in his FASTI. It is thus entered in the registr, "Quatenus studium in eadem facultate per 20 annos hic et alibi, &c." Registr. I. fol. 149. a., which he never took. He was created canon of Windsor by letters patent of Queen Mary, Apr. 2, 1554Rymer, Foed. xv. pag. 382. col. 2. But he did not succeed to the canonry of Richard Arche, deprived; as Willis observes in MS. notes on Le Neve's FASTI, MSS. Willis, Bibl. Bodl. For see Rymer, ubi supr. 365.. He was

instituted, Feb. 13, 1555. to the rectory of Chalfonte St. Giles's Bucks at the presentation of William SotholdMSS. Willis, spect. ad co. Bucks. No. 33. fol. ubi supr.; and on the deathWillis, ibid. of William Franklyn, fellow of King's college CambridgeFrithe's Catal. MS. decan. et canon. Vinsor., prebendary of York and LincolnWillis, CATHEDR. York, p. 165. And Lincoln, p. 199., arch-deaconIbid. Durham. p. 259. and chancellourRymer, Foed. xix. 282. of Durham, master of St. Giles'sWillis, ibid. hospital at Kepyer near Durham, and dean of WindsorMSS. Frithe, ut supr.. He was installed president of Trinity College Oxford, according to the founder's nomination, May 30, 1556. About the same time he resigned the vicarage of Chalfonte St. Peter'sFor Edm. Dorman occurs vicar in 1557. Willis, MSS. ut supr. No. 33.. I find him appointed, by the convocation of the university of Oxford, with others, Nov. 11, 1556, to regulate or supervise the exercises in theology, on the election of cardinal Pole to the chancellorshipRegistr. I. Congr. et Conv. fol. 163. b. Select delegates are also appointed for other services "dispicere quid in unaquaque re optimum fuerit." See also fol. 166. b.. He was deprived of the presidentship of Trinity college by queen Elisabeth's visitors in September, 1559. On

which, being commited to the Tower of London, he died there, about 1560Wood. Hist. et antiq. ut supr. ii. 295. col. 1..Richard Slythurst, with Thomas Broke, was made keeper of the park of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, by licence from Henry viii. with a fee of ijd. per diem, Apr. 24, 1513Priv. sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 4. Apr. 24.. William Slythurst received a lease from Henry viii. of certain possessions in Watlington, Oxfordshire, Jan. 27, 1522Bill. signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 13. Jan. 27. "Ad finem 21 annorum. reddendo [regi] annuatim, liijs. iiijd. And xiijs. ivd."—Part of these possessions is called "le heyhouse Milpole.". Another Richard Slythurst, of Berkshire, and of Brasennose college Oxford, occurs taking the degree of M.D. at Oxford, 1566Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 9. Some of his dispensations for the said degree are granted, amongst others, "ut crearetur doctor ante adventum reginae, et paratus sit ad disputandum coram illa." Ex Registr. Univ. ibid. citat.. He was a physician at Oxford, and died there in the parish of St. Peter in the East, 1586Wood, ibid. Et ex Testam. dat. 20. Jan. 1586. Prob. 23. Feb. seq. Registr. Act. cur. cancellar. Oxon. GG. fol. 253.. Another Richard Slythurst also was fellow of Magdalene college in Oxford, and supplicated for the degree of B.D. in 1543Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 5. compared with MSS. E. 9.. John Slythurst was a monk of the monastery of Missenden,

Bucks, and a priest, 1539Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. p. 31. I likewise find one Henry Slythurste presented to the vicarage of Dedham, co. Essex, by the bishop of London, Octob. 11, 1555. Newcourt, Repertor. ii. p. 210.. Probably these persons were all of the family of THOMAS SLYTHURST, the subject of this article; some of them being connected with his neighbourhood in the country, and others with the university of Oxford: Especially, as the Name is very singularIt is sometimes written Slighurst; as in a Will, where Thomas, the subject of this article, is remembered, dat. 1553. In registr. testam. archidiaconat. Buckingh. temp. regin. Mar. His ejection from his preferments is mentioned by Sanders, VISIBIL. MONARCH. lib. vii. p. 668. edit. 1592. fol.. He certainly had a brother, named JohnFrom an entry in a book in the library of Trinity college, viz. POLYANTHEA, Basil. 1512, fol. given, among others, by Thomas Slythurst the president.; whom I conclude to have been the monk abovementioned.FIRST FELLOWS.1. ARTHUR YELDARD.Born at Houghton-Strother near the river Tyne, in the county of Tindall, in NorthumberlandRegistr. prim. coll. Trin fol. 1. b. et 25.. He was educated in grammar and singing, as a boy of the almonry, or chorister, in the Benedictine convent, now the Dean and chapter, of DurhamMSS. F. Wise.. He

became afterwards one of the masters or assistants of Rotheram college in YorkshireIbid. For an account of this college, see Hearne's Lib. Nig. SCACC. p. 683. It had a provost, three fellows, six choristers, two masters in grammar, and another in music.. He was admitted a sizar of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, 1544Lib. Matric. univ. Cant. Where his name is spelt Yeldart.. He took the degree of A.B. in January 1547Registr. Univ. Cant. et Collectan. MSS. V. rev. et doctiss. Gul. Richardson, coll. Eman. Mag., and was elected fellow of Pembroke-Hall before 1550Collectan. MSS. mag. Atwood, olim aul. Pemb. soc.. He occurs junior treasurer of that house 1551In bishop Wren's manuscript HISTORIOLA of the master and fellows of Pembroke-hall, collected, as it seems, about 1624, these notices occur concerning Arthur Yeldard. "Yelder vel Yelderd. Northumbranus, artium baccalaureus, et thesaurarius junior, anno 1551. Post biennium desiit nominari. Illud nomen nunc forte pronuntiamus Geldar:—ARTHURUS YELDAR ei nomen est. SS. theologiae doctor, et secundus praefectus collegii SS. Trinitatis apud Oxonienses, &c."MSS. penes magistr. aul. Pembr. Cant.. He took the degree of M.A. in the same university 1552Registr. Univ. Cant. et collectan. MSS. D. Richardson, ut supr.. At Pembroke-hall he became tutor to Henry and Antony, sons to sir Antony DennySee Dedication, infra citat. Notes. Denny was the only person of the court, who dared to inform king Henry the eighth of the probability of his approaching Death, and one of the executors of that king's will., who were matriculated Nov. 27. 1552Lib. Matric. univ. Cant.. He afterwards

attended these young gentlemen on their travelsSed Dedication, infra citat. not.. While at Cambridge, for his better support in study, he received an annual exhibition from the princess, afterwards queen, Mary, by the hands of Dr. Francis Mallet, her chaplain and confessor, the last master of Michaelhouse in Cambridge, and, beside other promotions in the church, dean of LincolnTanner Bibl. pag. 504.. In the year 1553, he appears to have been at Dilling in FlandersSee Dedication, infra citat. not.: but he certainly did not go abroad, as Wood insinuatesHist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. 2S2. col. 2., on account of the reformation of religion in the reign of Edward the sixth; durall which it is manifest that he was resident at Cambridge. He seems to have left the kingdom on account of his two pupils above mentioned; with whom he travelled, as I have before observed. In the first year of queen Mary, 1553, while at Dilling, he translated from greek into latin, Documenta quaedam admonitoria Agapeti diaconiAutograph. MSS. Brit. Mus.—Inter. MSS. Bibl. Reg. 7. D. iv.. It is dedicated to the queen; and in the dedication, dated at Dilling, he mentions her majesty's many rare accomplishments; in particular, her knowledge of the latin and greek tonguesTo confirm and illustrate this and other passages in the text, I give the following Extracts from this Dedication.—"Ut difficillimis his christianae reipublicae temporibus, charitate ubique frigescente, vera religione oppressa et prope extincta, atque (ut uno verbo dicam) rebus omnibus fere ad summam desperationem adductis; eam nobis [D. O. M.] donavit REGINAM, quae ita est omni scientiarum cognitione exculta, ita et Graece quae rara est in saemina virtus, et Latine docta, ut in paucissimis Viris par similisque doctrina inveniatur; ut nulla his fere in rebus ei admonitore sit opus. Quippe quae omnium praeclarorum principum exempla quae quidem literis continentur, ad mores recte formandos pertinentia, in promptu habeat, eorumque optima semper in rebus gerendis imitetur et exprimat. Quae, etiam ab infantia, ita pietatis semper et veri cultus divini fuit studiosa; ut ob vitae sanctitatem, quantum homines conjectura assequi possunt, digna fit adeo judicata, ad quam Religio hoc toto fere regno exulans, tanquam in portum profugeret, &c."—"Quum ergo viderem admonitorias hasce Agapeti Sententias, et breves et nervosas, a nemine hactenus quod sciam digne donatas Latinitate; et statuissem aliquo grati animi indicio significare, me non esse immemorem beneficiorum, a Celsitudine tua per manus Doctoris MALLETTI acceptorum, quibus CANTABRIGIAE juvenis in studiis alebar: Judicavi eas esse dignas in quibus ita elaborarem, &c"—"Restat ergo, ut immortales gracias Majestati tuae habeam perpetuo, quod Discipulos meos mihi a parentibus erudiendos traditos, nobiles illos quidem summaeque spei adolescentulos DENNEIOS, et patre et matre jam orbatos, tanto amore prosequuta fueris, eorumque tutelam tam charam habueris, ut ne mater quidem indulgentius illorum incolumitati providere potuisset, quam est a te provisum: Quae, etsi eam ipsis longinquas regiones petendi facultatem annuere non es dedignata, quam parentes in vita saepe promiserant; tamen id omnino permittere noluit pietas tua eximia, antequam et Puerorum educationem exploraveras, et de tutorum etiam fide quorum curae commissi sunt accurate inquisiveras. Verumenimvero hujus tantae in illos indulgentiae uberrimi, deo favente, brevi percipientur fructus: Quum, tua providentia, scientiarum linguarumque variarum cognitione ornati, et multarum rerum usu atque experientia instructi, Viri in patriam redibunt; Majestatique tuae et reipublicae huic florentissimae ea fide servient, qua Patri tuo primum, deinde Fratri, regibus aeterna memoria dignissimis, servivit ipsorum pater prudentissimus ANTHONIUS DENNEIUS miles. Quod ut fiat, non modo precibus asiiduis D. O. M. urgebo, verum etiam ipse opera et industria mea, quantum potero, juvabo."—"Datum DALLANCIAE duodecimo Die Decemb. Anno regni tui augustiss. primo." Inscribed, "MARIAE, Angliae, Fsranciae et Hyberniae, Reginae serenissimae, ARTHURUS YELDARDUS Salutem optat aeternam.". A manuscript of

this piece is in the royal library, now part of the British Museum; and is the same that was presented

to queen Mary. He translated into Greek Sir Thomas More's CONSOLATORY DIALOGUE AGAINST TRIBULACION, written in the year 1534, and in the TOWER of LondonMS. F. Wise. Who says he had seen it among the curious manuscripts of Mr. Farmer of Tusmore in Oxfordshire. But it is not, I believe, to be found there at present. More's book is supposed by some to have been translated from the Latin of one Hungarus: and was printed at Antwerp by John Fowler in 1573. 12mo.. On the foundation of Trinity college at Oxford, he was admitted, by the founder's nomination, a fellow of the same, May 30, 1556, and was incorporated M.A. in that university, Nov. 12, the same yearWood Ath. Oxon. i. f. 85.. The circumstance of his having been patronised in his studies at Cambridge by the princess Mary who was now queen, and his connection with the family of Denny, must have been instrumental to this nomination. He appears to have been in high favor and esteem with the founder; who appointed him the first philosophy-lecturer

in his college, yet permitted him to be absent, and to serve that office by deputy, for many monthsEx Comp. Burss. 1556.. I have before taken noticeSupr. p. 188., that the founder placed his son in law, John Beresford, at Trinity college, under the tuitionAll the Convictores admitted into the college, are ordered to be placed under the tuition of one of the fellows. It seems also, that these were attended by their private preceptors. For in the Statutes of the college, where mention is made of the number of Convictores to be admitted, it is immediately added, "cum DIDASCALIS suis ipsos comitantibus." Cap. x. of this learned and experienced preceptor: to whom on that occasion, he sent the following letter.
Mr. Yelder, with my right herty commendations.I send to yow my son Mr. Basford, whom with the rest committed to your charge I requyre yow so to instruct as theye may proffytt in lernynge: ffor doing whereoff ye shall not fynde me unthankfull. I will not forget yow, so soon as I shall see convenyent tyme. and thus fare ye well. Written at London the xiiith of July, anno 1557.Your loving ffrend, THO. POPEEx Autograph. ubi supr..
He wrote latin prose with great elegance and perspicuity. He seems to have been employed in the verbal composition of the college-statutes; for the founder in a letter to the president, Nov. 26, 1556, orders a reward to "Maister Yeldard, in consideration of the paynes he took to pen my statutes." On the deprivation of Slythurste, the first president, abovementioned, 1559, he was presented, with Stephen Markes, mentioned in the next article, to Dame Elisabeth Pope, the foundress; who nominated him president, and he was accordingly admitted Sept. 26, 1559Wood says, "Visitatorum jussu successit." Hist. Ant. univ. Oxon. i. 282. But this is a mistake; for he was regularly and duly nominated and admitted. Registr. praedict. fol. 24., to the great satisfaction of the societyFrom their letter to the foundress, ibid. In which they say, that both the candidates are, "moste worthye the office, bothe for the meyntenaunce of good and godlie livinge, and also for the commeditie of the coledge in politike affaires." The foundress, in her answer, says, she has chosen him, trusting "it shall be for the comoditie of the coledge, and also for all your comfrethe and quietness."ibid. fol. 24. b.. He took the degree of B.D. Jun. 24, 1563Wood Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. 92.. And of D.D. Feb. 15, 1565Ibid. 95.. He was presented by the same Dame Elisabeth, Feb. 12, 1571, to vicarage of Much-Waltham in EssexThe next person presented to the same, but by the president and fellows of Trinity college, Oxon. was Nicholas Yeldard; I suppose, his brother, but not of the college, Sept. 10, 1574. Registr. prim. coll. fol. 29. b. And Newcourt, Repertor. ii. 632. Afterwards the same dame Elisabeth made over the advowson, pro hac vice, to the said Arthur Yeldard, and he presented Rob. Palmer, not a fellow, Octob. 6, 1585. Registr. Grindall, episc. London. And Newcourt, ut supr. 633.. In September, 1566,

he disputed in divinity before queen Elisabeth, during her magnificent reception at Oxford; Juel, bishop of Salisbbury, being the moderatorMSS. Baker. vol. vi. p. 141. b. Brit. Mus. Harl. MSS. 7033. He was appointed, Jul. 13, 1580, by the earl of Leicester, vice-chancellor of the universityWood, Hist. antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 429.. I find him commissioned, Jun. 10, 1583, with four other Doctors, to recieved Albertus de Lasco a prince of Poland, accompanied by lord Leicester and other nobles, at their public entry into Oxford: who were entertained in the university for the four following days, with sumptuous banquets, disputations, orations, sermons, and two plays presented in Christ Church hallIbid. i. 299. Hollinsh. Chron. iii. 1355.. In the year 1576, he was empowered, in conjunction with others, to correct and reform the whole body of the statutes of the universityWood, Hist. antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 294 col. 1.. He continued president of the college thirty nine years, four months and three daysRegistr. prim. dicti coll. fol. 53.. He died Feb. 2, 1598-9Ibid., and was buried in the chapel

of the collegeAs I collect from the following articles in Comp. Burss. 1598-9."Sol. operariis et caenae funebri desuncti praesidentis, et pro jentaculis sociorum proficisc. ad episcopum Winton, et pro caena eorundem post reditum. xl s. ob. q."Sol. pulsanti campanam. ijd."Sol. pro ly bellman. ijd.. He has a copy of latin verses, among others of the capital scholars of those times, viz. Alexander Nowell, Herbert Westphalinge, Thomas Bodley, George Buchanan, etc. at the end of Humphreys's Life of bishop Jewel, 1573Johannis Juelli Vita, &c. Lond. 4to.. He has likewise a latin poem prefixed to John Case's Speculum Moralium Quaestionum, Oxon. 1585. It appears that he died very old, by another latin copy of versesOf which he says, Quae dolor atque amor extorsere seni meditanti.His will is dated Jan. 8, 1598. Proved April 16, 1599. Apod Registr. Actor. cur. cancellar. Oxon. GG. fol. 178. b. archiv. acad. Oxon. It contains nothing remarkable. He leaves all his effects, of every kind, to Eleanor his wife; whom he likewise appoints executrix. Except that he bequeathes six volumes of the Centuriae Magdeburgenses to the college library. written by him, in a collection of Oxford verses, on the death of Sir Richard UntonIntitled, "Funebria nobilissimi et praestantissimi equitis D. HENRICI VNTONI ad Gallos bis legati regii, &c. a. Musis Oxonienfibus apparata, 1596. 4to." It was made and published by Doctor Robert Wright, fellow of Trinity college, Oxford, afterwards bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. Who has also prefixed a good latin preface. Wood (ATH. Oxon. ii. 1137.) does not mention this publication by Dr. Wright. The collection is closed with two copies by Wright; the last of which, being in a fingular strain, and much superior to the taste of those times, I am tempted to insert.Haec, Untone, tuo cecinere in funere musaeOxonides, tristes munera ad inserias:Oxonides musae, quarum es nutritus in ulnis:Heu, teneras lacrymarum imbre rigante genas!Quae tibi postremo nostri pro munere amoris,Curavi in memores jam reserenda typos.Accipiant Iaeti manes studia ista tuorum,At tu, patrone o dulcis, ave atque vale! By the former of these two copies, it appears, that Wright accompanied sir Henry Unton, in one of his embassies into France, to the French king's camp at Lasere, in which sir Henry died, 1595. See Ashm. BERKSH. i. 190. iii. 313. In Thomas Newton's ENCOMIA, printed 1589, is an epigram addressed, "Ad eruditissimum virum ROBERTUM WRIGHTUM nobilissimi Essexiae comitis samulum primarium." p. 124. This I judge to be the same Robert Wright; especially from the two concluding lines.Ubera cui Charites dant, et favet innuba Pallas,Quemque beat docta doctus Apollo chely.Dr. Robert Wright was born at Saint Alban's, and elected scholar of Trinity college, Oxford, aged fifteen, jun. 7. 1574. Registr. Coll. prim. f. 36. Fellow, being then bachelor of Arts, May 25, 1581. Ibid. f. 39. He was successively chaplain to queen Elisabeth, and king James the first. He was presented, by lord keeper Egerton, to the rectory of Brixton Deverel in Wiltshire, Nov. 29. 1596. MS. Tanner, ad Wood's ATHEN. ii. 1135. He was instituted Rector of Hayes in Middlesex, on the presentation of William lord Pembroke, Apr. 4. 1601. Admitted Dec. 21. in the same year canon residentiary and treasurer of Wells. He was also vicar of Sunning in Berkshire, and Rector of Bourton upon the Water in Gloucestershire. See Newc. REPERTOR. i. 641. In 1613 he was appointed the First Warden of Wadham college, by the foundress dame Dorothy Wadham. In 1622, consecrated bishop of Bristol; and in 1632, translated to the see of Lichfield and Coventry. Prynne say, that bishop Wright placed a "goodly crueisixe in a frame with the pictures of men and women devoutly praying to it," above the altar in Litchfield cathedral, and that he was greatly concerned in composing the late canons, oaths, &c. That at Bristol, he sued the Dean and chapter for opposing him in placing Images in the cathedral, and other churches, there. That he introduced many superstitious innovations at Bristol "to humour Canterbury [Laud,] by whose means he was translated to Coventry and Litchfield."Antipathie of the English Lordly Prelacie, &c. Lond. 1641. 4to. ch. v. pag. 292. ch. vi. BRISTOLL.In 1641. he was one of the protesting bishops, with eleven more: and before his committment to the Tower, spoke an eloquent oration at the bar of the House of Commons, which is extant. He died in the year 1643, at his palace at Eccleshall while it was besieged by the rebels. Of this venerable prelate there is preserved a good old portrait on board at Trinity college, concerning which the following notice occurs, COMP. Burss. coll. Trin. 1632.—3. "Pro imagine episcopi Lichfieldensis adornanda, xvjs." At sir Charles Adderley's house in Warwickshire, there was a picture of bishop Wright, with a long inscription. ANTIQUITIES OF LITCHFIELD CATHEDR. Lond. 1717. pag. 51. Another belonging to sir John Davies at Bere Court in Berkshire, Ashm. BERKSH. ii. 337. (See also ibid. 397.) There is another at Wadham-college..2. STEPHEN MARKES.Born in Cornwall. He was a fellow of Exeter college, Oxford, where he took the degree of A.B. 1552Wood. MSS. ut supr. E. 5.. Made A.M. Jul, 11, 1554Id. ib. E. 29.. On Octob. 17, 1555, he was elected rector of the said college,

then an annual office, and held by the fellowsId. D. 2. pag. 306.. In the year of his rectorship he was admitted, as above, a fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. May 30, 1556. At the same time he was appointed vice-president of the same by the founder. He was in nomination for the presidentship with Arthur Yeldard, in Sept. 1559, on the deprivation of Slythurste; as was observed in the preceding article. He supplicated for the degree of B.D. Octob. 10, 1559Registr. I. Congreg. et Conv. fol. 185.. He had quitted his fellowship before the end of the year 1560Ut patet ex Registr. coll. prim. fol. 140..3. JOHN BARWYKE.Born in Devonshire. He was of Magdalene college, Oxford. He appears to have been recommended to the founder by Alexander Belsire, the First President of Saint John'sMSS. F. Wise. Formerly fellow of New college, and canon of Christ Church.. Took the degree of A.B. 1549. And of M.A. April 27, 1556Wood, MSS. Ib. D. 6. And E. 29. One John Barwicke was ordained an Accolyte in Baliol college chapel, Mar. 9, 1554. Being then SCHOLARIS collegii Magdalenae. REGISTR. Rob. King, Episcop. Oxon. f. 80. Also a John Barwicke occurs, at the same time and place, ordained Subdeacon, he being then bachelor of arts and fellow of Magdalene college. Ibid. By the way, it appears from this register, which begins 1543, that bishop King, the first bishop of Oxford and last abbot of Oseney, usually held his ordinations in Capella Manerii de Thame-Parke..

Admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. by nomination as above. At the same time appointed dean by election. He quitted his fellowship about the year 1565Comp. Burss. 1564-5..4. JAMES BELL.Born in Somersetshire. Was scholar of C. C. C. Oxon, where he took the degree of B.A. 1551Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6. and Athen. Oxon. i. f. 75.. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. At the same time appointed rhetoric-lecturer by election. He left his fellowship about Michaelmas, in the year of his admissionRegistr. KETTELL. viz. cui tit. "ALUMNI illi quos venerabilis vir, THOMAS, cognomento POPE, ordinis militaris, in hoc domicilio alendos statuit: et non solum ipsorum victui moribusque prospexit, verum etiam ut bona ingenia bonis artibus et disciplinis imbuerentur, ad sinceram Christi Religionem populo Christi strenue commendandam, impense curavit." Apud Coll. Trin. in pergamen. fol. It was drawn up by Dr. Kettel, president; and continued, by him, from the foundation to the year 1602, inclus. The original draught of this Register, in Kettel's own hand, is in the Ashmolean Museum, codd. A. Wood, 8490. fol. 28. with many interpolations, corrections, and additions, in the hand of its collector. This last-mentioned copy of the said register, which seems to have been given to A. Wood by Dr. Buthurst, president, is here cited, and will be often afterwards, in the course of this article of the APPENDIX., and suddenly became a zealous assertor of the reformation; in

defence of which he published several pieces, here enumerated. A translation of Luther's treatise of Christian Liberty. Lond. 1579. 8vo. A translation of John Fox's Sermon of the Evangelical Olive. Lond. 1578. A translation of Fox's Sermon preached at the Christening of a certain Jew at London, 1577. 16mo. A translation of Fox's and Haddon's Answer apologetical to Hierome Osorius his slanderous Invective. 1581. 4toSee Strype, Ann. Ref. i. p. 433.. A translation of Fox's Pope confuted. Lond. 1580. 4to. In the preface of this last piece, the translator, Bell, mentions his happy conversion to protestantism from popery. "I wandered long in the selfsame mizmaze, nooseled therein by the grayheaded of that schoole, whose countenance carried me from my Christe to the swinstie of the Sorbone, which had swalowed me up, if the Lord had not prevented me betimes." In the same, he takes notice of being "taxed by a friend with apostasy." Wood calls our author "a great admirer of John Fox, the martyrologistAthen. Oxon. i. 232.." Among the manuscripts of the royal library, now in the British Museum, is one entitled, James Bell's account of Caecilia princess of Sweeden her travelling into England, 1564, dedicated to Q. Elisabeth17. C. XXIX. charta.. He was installed, Feb. 13, 1595, into the prebend of Holcombe in the cathedral church of Wells; and Octob. 11, the same year, into the prebend of

Combe in the same churchTanner, BIBL. pag. 95.. Tanner, having mentioned Bell's preferments at Wells, adds, "Hic Jacobus Bell mihi videtur ille Somersetensis, qui primo scholaris collegii Corporis Christi Oxon, beccalaureus artium admissus A. 1551, et postea sub finem mensis Maii, A. 1556, socius collegii Trinitatis electus. Refragari tamen videtur aetas." Tanner means, that he was rather too old, to have lived to take these preferments. But he might be admitted at the university, as was antiently the custom, very young: and, beside the circumstance of his county, his sudden departure from the college, and the history of his religious principles, all taken together, render it highly probable that he was the same person.5. JOHN RICHARDSON.Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's collegeI know not if scholar is here the proper style. Nor do I fully comprehend the system of the antient foundation of Queen's college. But the members are thus distinguished in the establishment of an Obit in the chapel there, dated Oct. 6. 1538. The provost if present is to receive ijs."Every felowe and scoler beyng present, xxd. Every chaplayne, vjd. Every mayster of the chyldrene, vjd. Every chylde of the taberd, iiijd. Every clerk of the chapell, iiijd. Every poyr [poor] chylde, ijd. Archiv. Coll. Regin. Oxon. [MSS. Ed. R. MORES, fol. 116.]" And in another Obit, dated Febr. 21. 1516. "To every felowe, chaplayne, mayster of the chyldren, and to the chyldren of the howse, the clerkes of the chapel, and to every scoler beyng poyr chylde, &c." Ibid. [MSS. ut supr. fol. 113.], Oxford; where he took the degree of

B.A. in March 1553Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6. and E. 5. He was ordained subdeacon, ratione studii ultra decennium continuati, in Oxford cathedral, Sept. 19. 1556. Registr. Episc. Oxon. fol. 90.. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. At the same time appointed bursar by election. He had quitted the college before the end of 1560Ex Comp. Burss.. He was afterwards, as I collect, instituted to be rectory of St. Saviour's, in York, 1567, where he died 1591Drake's Ebor. p. 311..6. GEORGE SYMPSON.Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's college, Oxford; where he took the degree of B.A. in March, 1553Wood, Ibid.. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. Made M.A. Jul. 8, 1558Wood, MSS. E. 29.. He was ejected for popery about 1561, and ordered, with others, not to be seen within twenty miles of either of the universities, under severe penaltiesSee Strype, Ann. Ref. iv. 275. compared with MSS. Kettel. supr. citat..7. GEORGE RUDDE.Born in Westmoreland. Was scholar of Queen's college, Oxford; where he took the degree of B.A.

in March, 1553Wood, D. 6. E. 5.. From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He was made M.A. Jul. 8, 1558Wood, MSS. E. 29.. He quitted his fellowship about Easter, in 1563MSS. Kettel..8. THOMAS SCOTTE.Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's college, Oxford; where he took the degree of B.A. Jul. 5, 1554Wood, E. 6. and E. 5.. Admitted, from thence, fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He took the degree of M.A. Jul. 6, 1556Id. E. 29.. He was elected one of the proctors of the university, Apr. 25, 1560Wood, Hist. antiq. ii. 426.. But the same year, or very soon afterwards, he was ejected from his fellowship, with others, for refusing the oath of supremacy to queen ElisabethIbid. i. 284..9. ROGER CRISPIN.Born in Devonshire. Elected fellow of Exeter college, Oxford, 1550Wood, MSS. D. 2. p. 42., where he took the degree of B.A. Dec. 8, 1554Ibid. D. 6. This person, and some others of Exeter college, recited in these two LISTS of the FIRST FELLOWS and SCHOLARS, were recommended to the Founder by John Holyman, the second bishop of Bristol in 1554, originally fellow of New-college, then a monk of Reading abbey, and afterwards, on the dissolution of his monastery, a retired student in Exeter college till about 1553. MSS. F. Wise. In an Epistle to the University of Oxford, dated 1530, from Hugh Faringdon abbot of Reading, he is characterised as a theologist and a preacher of great erudition. Registr. FF. fol. 101, 102. Alexander Belsire his cotemporary in New-college, and the First President of Saint John's, was his intimate friend to his death. Dying in 1558, he bequeathed several books to the library of Winchester college.—For the character of abbot Hugh Faringdon, abovementioned, Holyman's patron, see HIST. ENGL. POETR. vol. ii. p. 446. And Willis, MITR. ABB. i. 161. See also Wood, HIST. ANTIQ. Univ. Oxon. i. 252. a. ii. 95. b. 136. a.. From thence admitted

fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He took the degree of M.A. Jul. 8, 1558Wood, MSS. E. 29.. He quitted his fellowship about the feast of All Saints in 1562MSS. Kettel. The following article occurs concerning him in the beginning of the same year, Comp. Burss. 1591-2. "Solut. 16 Jan. pro expens. magistri Crispin equitantis ad Londinum ad emenda salsamenta et halecia pro quadragesima, xs..10. ROGER EVANS.Born in Cornwall. Perhaps of Exeter college. I find nothing of him in the university registers, or elsewhere, but that he was admitted when A.B. a fellow as above; and that he left his fellowship at the end of 1559Registr. MSS. Rad. Kettel. ut supr., I suppose on the accession of Elisabeth, and the change of religion.11. JOHN PERTE.Born in Warwickshire. Took the degree of A.B. May 8, 1556MSS. Wood, ut supr. D. 6.. Admitted fellow of Trin. coll. by the founder's nomination, as above. Admitted, at the same time, one of the bursars by election. I find him often mentioned in the founder's letters, as employed in transcribing the college-statutesThis is the oldest copy now remaining in the college; except the original one, signed and sealed by the founder. It is on parchment. The next, in point of antiquity, is one sent to the bishop of Winchester, which is also on parchment, and bears the following inscription prefixed."Reverendiffimo in Christo patri, et dignissimo patrono protectorique nostro unico, domino Episcopo Winton.""QUOD per hos decem annos subinde desideravit amplitudo vestra, clarissime PRAESUL, curavimus tandem effectum dare. Humillime offerimus exemplar STATUTORUM illorum, quae injunxit nobis beatae memoriae FUNDATOR noster fingularis, dominus THOMAS POPE, miles; et quorum observantiae invigilat feliciter eximia vestra sollicitudo. Unaque cum ipsis, nosmet, nostrum statum fidemque nostram, vestrae, colendissime ANTISTES, fidissimae tutelae, favorique benignissimo, unanimiter et supplicissime cupimus esse in perpetuum concreditos et commendatos. Dat. Oxon. April 1. A.D. 1609, Vestrae amplitudini devotissime devincti, Praes. et Soc. Coll. Trin. Oxon. &c." [Compare p. 125. supr. Note, g. And p. 248. Note, a] In the beginning of Cromwell's usurpation, on the dissolution of the bishopricks, this copy was returned to the college, by the deprived bishop Morley, where it now remains.. He left the college in 1558Registr. Ketell., being, as I suspect,

removed for turbulence and contumacy. It appears by the founder's letters, that he had excited and encouraged a faction in the college, under pretence that the statutes were unreasonably strictBy the same letters it appears, that he was ordered to appear before the founder, I suppose, at London; and to bring with him his objections to the statutes drawn out in form, which now remain. These objections the founder intended to lay before the deau of St. Paul's: this was Dr. Henry Cole, who also was, or had been, warden of New college Oxford, provost of Eton, prebendary of saint Paul's and Salisbury, archdeacon of Ely, and vicar general of the spiritualties under Cardinal Pole. He was likewise an eminent civilian, and joined in a commission with Sir Thomas Pope. He is celebrated as a classical scholar in Leland's ENCOM. p. 79. edit. 1589.Ascham has left this testimony of Cole's literature and humanity. "Tantum ego et communi omnium voci de tua eruditione, et frequenti Morysini sermoni de tua humanitate, semper tribui, doctissime humanissimeque Cole, ut imperitus ipse si te non colerem, et inhumanus si non amarem, merito videri possim." Epistol. R. Ascham. lib. iii. Asch. Colo. edit. Lond. 1581. p. 154 b 12mo. with a present of Aristaeas, &c. Sir Richard Morysine, or Morison, here mentioned, was one of Ascham's most distinguished literary friends, a great friend to the Reformation, and sent by Henry the eighth, and his successor, an embassador to the emperour Charles the fifth. He died, an exile for religion, at Strasburgh in 1556.. This affair seems to have given the founder much uneasiness and concern; and he frequently speaks of it in his letters to the president. At length, it occasioned the following address in form to the whole society.To his lovinge ffriends the fellowes of Trinitie college in Oxforde.With my hartie commendations. As I was not a little greved of the reporte of late made unto me, that, contrarie to my expectations, there sholde be any such lyghtness amonge you, as not to approve those my Statutes which I sent you; being drawen and collectede, as well oute of the good orders of other colleges, as also by the advise and cownsell of diverse most sage and wise heddes; and that for the rigour of them, as it was termed, moste parte of you would wantonlie forsake my college, and the Benefit you had by me there: So fyndinge by letters comynge from diverse of you, the same reporte to be untrue; have conceived better opinion of you, occasioninge me the lese to repente my Charge, which I have, and shallIn a letter from him to the president, dat. Whitmonday, 1558, he says, "I shall by [buy] of the master of the Rolls ii. ffaier manors with ii. advowsons in Lyncolnshere, which I entende to gyve to my collegge." Amongst others, he might perhaps here mean this intended donation; which, however, never took effect. I suppose, on account of the founder's death, which happened a few months afterwards. In another letter, from and to the same, without date, but written 1558, he promises to assure to the college three other advowsons with all convenient speed. But, I suppose, for the reason abovementioned, they never came to the college., bestowe amonge you. And as I cannot but much commende and allowe the

stayed witte and mature discretion of those among you, which do declare themselves content with such my Ordinances as I gave unto you, whom as occasion shall serve I must allwaye thynke worthye to be had in my memorie; so I require you All, quietlie to receive these Statutes which I eftsonesForthwith, or again. send you, sealed and subscribed with my handeSee note in pag. 248.: myndinge not for any man's pleasure, hereafter, to alter and change any of them. Signifieinge the gryeffes that have been exhibited unto me by some of you; and [that] being perused and seene of diverse honorable, wise, and learned men, with the Statutes thereunto appertayningeAdditamentum. See ibid., [they] are in no wise"Lyked—to be altered." i. e. No alteration is approved or lyked. lyked or thought mete to be altered. Wherefore, if any among yowe cannot persuade himselfe to be content with these my Orders and Decrees, I hartyly require the same, without disturbance, to gyve place unto such others as will obedientlie lyve under the same; and, when he shall see his tyme, to departe from my saide college, which to do he shall have my goode wille and favour. And thus praying you to have me in remembrance, with your prayers to God, I bid you all farewell.

Written at London, the xxvth of Aprill, 1558.Your loving ffrende, T. POPEE Registr. primo coll. praedict. fol. 16. b..{inverted ⁂} When this person was removed from his fellowship, the founder intended, partly on the recommendation of cardinal Pole, to place in his room the learned William Alan, a name equally celebrated among the catholics, and proscribed by the protestants. But that design did not take effect: he being promoted about the same time, and probably by the interest of sir Thomas Pope, to a canonry in the cathedral of YorkMSS. F. Wise, ut supr.. Alan was an able controversialist in defence of the declining doctrines of the church of Rome: educated at Oriel college, and about the year 1556, appointed Principal of saint Mary's HALL, and elected one of the proctors of the university of Oxford. Upon the accession of queen Elisabeth, he retired to Louvain, where he wrote his famous book on PURGATORY and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD, which abounds in rhetoric more than argument, and contains much ingenious declamation and sophistry. Soon afterwards he returned to England, where he published many specious apologies for his religion, which he dispersed with great art and industry. But the treatise just mentioned

was the basis of his polemical reputation. As he wrote chiefly for the conviction of his countrymen, most of his compositions are in English; and are not inelegant specimens of style, at a time when the state of our language was rude and unsettled. A solid old English critic pronounces one of Alan's tracts to be "a princely, grave, and flourishing piece of natural and exquisite EnglishBolton's HYPERCRIT. iv. §. 2.." Being again driven abroad, he was rewarded with a canonry in each of the churches of Cambray and Rheims. At length standing high in the esteem of pope Sixtus the fifth, he was constituted a Cardinal, and archbishop of Mechlin in BrabantWood, ATH. Oxon. i. 268. And his LIFE, written by Nich. Fitzerbert. Antw. 1621. 8vo.. It is not the least of his dignities, and it is a proof of the universality of his literature, that he was librarian of the VaticanMiraeus, SCRIPT. SAEC. xvi. p. 68.. His activity was indefatigable in the support of his profession. He was a principal instrument in establishing the English catholic seminaries at Doway and Rheims, and several others in Spain and Italy. His intemperate papistic zeal, which he imprudently carried into the dangerous politics of the times, and which prompted him to circulate seditious papers in England to prepare the way for the Spanish invasion, was censured even by those of his own intolerant persuasion. He died aged only sixty three years,

in 1594Wood, ut supr. Pits. 792.. Vertue had a curious cast of his head, from an original medallion.12. ROBERT BELLAMIE.Born in Yorkshire. Of Exeter college, as I collect. Took the degree of B.A. May 8, 1556Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6.. He was admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, viz. May 30, 1556. I find him nominated one of the first fellows of St. John's college, Oxford, by sir Thomas Whyte, the founder, in his charter, dat. Mar. 7, 1557-8MSS. Catal. Gr. Higgs, ut inf.. This appointment he did not, however, accept; for he occurs one of the bursars of Trinity college 1565Comp. Burss. 1564-5. And Registr. PERROT, supr. citat. (Numb. xxi.) fol. 112. a.. He took the degree of M.A. May 28, 1560Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 8.. He afterwards proceeded in physic; and, as I suppose by dispensation, took the degree of M.B. Dec. 16, 1562Ibid.. On Jun. 23, 1571, he took the degree of M.D. having quitted his fellowship 1565, and removed to St. John's college, as an independent memberWood Ath. i. f. 105.. Higgs, in his catalogue of fellows of St John's college, mentions him as one of the first fellows of the same; but Wood, in the margin, says he was

fellow of Trinity collegeMSS. Mus. Ashm. F. 28. fol. 204. b.. Wood also omits him in his first fellows of St, John's; where he was only nominated, and never admittedHist. Ant. ii. 303.. In Nov. 1589, he was made master of Shireburne hospital, near Durham, by bishop Hutton; who, in a letter to the lord Treasurer, calls him "an honest man, a preacher and a physician; to have charge both of the souls and bodies of the poor, impotent, sick, persons of that hospitalDat. March, 1590. apud Strype, Ann: iv. p. 15.." On Octob. 31, 1573, he was installed canon of the third stall of Durham cathedral. He was also rector of Houghton in the bishoprick of DurhamWillis, CATHEDRALS. cath. Durham, p. 266, 278, 280.. He was living 1590Hutton's letter in Strype, ubi supr. Willis, ut supra, says. by mistake, that he died 1588. One Robert Bellamie occurs a seminary priest in 1588. Strype, iii. 260. ut supr.. He is characterised, with others of the church of Durham, in a latin manuscript poem, preserved among Wood's papers in the Ashmolean Museum, entitled ITER BOREALE8553. 91. It has marginal notes by the author. Concerning this Robert Bellamie, the same, as I presume, I find the following entry in the Register of the University. "April 10, 1562. Suplicat Robertus Bellamie A.M. quatenus graciose cum eo dispensetur ut amplius proelegere non teneatur. Causa est, quia tot et tantis negotiis domi impeditur ut nullo pacto praelegere possit. CONCESS. modo substituat alium. Non observat conditionem." Registr. Congr. et Conv. I. fol. 203. a., written by Dr. Richard Eedes, canon of Christ Church, Oxon, and

afterwards dean of Worcester. This journey was taken 1584.FIRST SCHOLARS.1. JOHN LANGSTERRE. [or Langasteri. e. Lancaster..]Born in Yorkshire. Of Brasen-nose college, Oxford, where he took the degree of B.A. Mar. 26, 1556Wood, MSS. D. 6.. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. May 30, 1556. Aetat. 19. Made probationer fellow, by the founder's mandate, Dec. 25, 1556Registr. prim. coll. fol. 4. b., and actual, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558Registr. ibid. fol. 4. b. His year of probation was protracted by the founder's command, who says in a letter to the president, "Concering sir Langester's yeare of probation I will he be ordered therein according to the statutes." Dat. 27 Nov. 1556.. Made M.A. May 15, 1560Wood, MSS. E. 29.. He quitted his fellowship about the year 1563Comp. Burss. 1562-3..2. REGINALD BRAYE.Born in Bedfordshire, and descended from sir Reginald Bray of Eton-Bray in that county, famous in the reign of Edward the fourthLee's VISIT. Oxv. 1574. ut supr. pag. 45.. Took the

degree of A.B. at Oxford, May 8, 1556Wood, MSS. D. 6.. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, aged 18. He left the college in Hilary term the same yearMSS. Kettel..3. JOHN ARDEN. [or Ardern.]Born in Oxfordshire, and of an antient and respectable family settled at Cottisford, or Kirtlington. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, Aet. 18. Related to the founderSee supr. p. 327.. Left the college about Michaelmas, in 1558MSS. Kettel.. Afterwards he gave eighteen volumes or more to the libraryIn which he is stiled ARMIGER..4. JOHN COMPORTE.Born in Middlesex. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. Aet. 18. He took the degree of A.B. May 23, 1558Wood, MSS. E. 6.. Made probationer fellow, by the founder's mandate, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558Registr. coll. ut supr. fol. 4. b.. He left his fellowship in the end of the year 1560MSS. Kettel.. He gave to the library Robert Holcot upon the SentencesFol. See Lib. Benef. bibl. coll. Trin. in pergam..5. ROBERT THRAKSE.Born in Somersetshire. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, Aet. 18. He left the college about Michaelmas 1558MSS. Kettel., having taken the degree of A.B. the same year, Feb. 1Wood, MSS. E. 6..6. WILLIAM SALTMARSHE.Born in Yorkshire. He seems to have been first of Brazen-nose collegeMSS. Wood, E. 6. in Marg. sub. an. 1558.. Admitted scholar of Trinity college. Oxon. by the founder's nomination, as above, aged 18. Took the degree of A.B. May 23, 1558MSS. Wood, E. 6. scil. ut supr.. Made probationer fellow, by the founder's mandate, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558Registr. coll. fol. iv. 6.. He took the degree of M.A. Decemb. 1, 1562MSS. Wood, E. 29.. He is mentioned in the WillIn Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon. of Edward Hyndmer, a fellow of the collegeAdmis. schol. Jun. 4, 1561, soc. 1568, Jun. 7. Registr., and a memorable benefactor to the library, viz. "I bequeathe to my old good friende sir Henrie Saville, knight, warden of Merton colledge in Oxford, my houpe gold ring; and to Mr. Thomas Allen my old friende

and fellowe in Trinitie colledge, but now of Gloucester-halle, my golde ringe with deathes heade inameled, which was sometime our friende Mr. SaltmarshesThis will is dat. Novemb. 15, 1607.." I conjecture, that he was inclined to the catholic persuasion; not only from his connections with this Edward HyndmerIt seems probable that this Edward Hyndmer had a strong tendency to the catholic persuasion, from the circumstance of his quitting his fellowship when he ought to have taken orders. He was admitted M.A. on Decemb. 4, 1570, and left the college about 1576. MSS. Wood, E. 29. and Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1575-6. I likewise find in a book of his private accounts, made long after he left the college, "Expended for a BREVIARIE, xvis." In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. He appears to have lived many years in the family of sir Robert Dormer, at Winge in Bucks. Ex chartis, ibid. By his will, mentioned in the text, and written with his own hand, he leaves to sir Robert Dormer, "iij spurr-royalls and a double duckatt," as a small remembrance of great favours received from him. To lady Elisabeth Dormer, "my honorable mistris," two twentyshilling pieces; and to their son, sir William Dormer, forty shillings in angels. He bequeathes legacies to all sir Robert Dormer's servants by name. He leaves to Trinity college, legacies to the amount of 157l. 14s. part of which was expended in furnishing the library with book-cases. [Ex Chart. ibid. et Comp. Burss.] Likewise to the library, a great number of books; many of them French and Italian. To the poor of the parish of Winge, vl. He appoints the fellows of Trinity college, aforesaid, executor, of his will; and sir Henry Saville, "my verie honorable friende," overseer. He desires to be buried in the chapel of Trinity college; but by a discretionary power left with his executors, he was interred in the church of Winge, Aug. 20, 1618.. Ex chart. ut supr. He was near eighty years of age when he died, and was born in Westmoreland. Registr. coll. Trin. In the said Will, he remembers many of his relations, of his own name, living at Kirkbie-Stephen in Westmoreland.He was in high favour with the foundress: as appears from the following entry, written by Ralph Bathurst, fellow, afterwards president of Trinity college, Oxford, in a blank leaf of Budden's LIFE OF BISHOP WAINFLET, edit. 1602, in the library of that college. "Bibliothecae coll. Trin. Oxon. libellum hunc inter alics complures legavit D. EDWARDUS HINDMER. Quo procurante, auctor ejus, Johannes BUDDENUS, Scholaris locum ex gratia dominae fundatricis apud nos obtinuit, A.D. 1583. Inde post annos aliquammultes ad praelectoris philosophici munus a Magdalenensibus electus, banc Wainfleti suiedidit. Quam egregii viri D. Job. BOWMAN et D. Fr. FIELD, collegi nostri tunc temporis socii, ejusque ibidem coaetanei, prout in registro collegii patet, elogiis poeticis exornarunt. R. B. 1655." Budden, Waynflet's biographer, was first of Merton college: where he was taken particular notice of by sir Henry Saville, who recommended him to his friend Edward Hyndmer above-mentioned, as a proper candidate for a scholarship of Trinity college. To which he was elected May 30, 1583. After five years, intending to study the civil law, he left Trinity college, and retired to Gloucester-hall; chiefly for the conversation of the learned Thomas Allen, mentioned in this article. Afterwards he was appointed philosophy-reader in Magdalene college, principal of New Inn-Hall, king's professor of civil law, and principal of Broadgates-hall. He wrote some other pieces. He died 1620.About the same time, and for the ame reason, I find one Thomas Warren, fellow of Trinity college, retiring to Glocester-hall. [Schol. Jun. 14, 1568. Soc. Jun. 3. 1572. Registr. Kettel.] The motives for his recession, hinted above, expressly appear from the following entry concerning him. Registr. Thesauriar. 4to. "Post susceptum gradum Artum Magistri anno quarto [1579] recessit ad aulam Glocestrensem." He was afterwards buried in the chapel of Trinity college, April 28, 1598. Wood's Collectan. e Parochial. Registr. Oxon. Paroch. S. Thom. Mus. Ashmol. D. 5. George Blackwell also, fellow of the said college, receded to Glocester-hall, "where he was held in good repute by Edm. Rainolds and Thomas Allen, the two learned seniors," about 1568. Wood. Ath. Oxon. i. p. 382. Numb. 449. [See Lel. Itin. ii. 105. edit. 1745] Afterwards he went to Rome: where, by Henry Cardinal Cajetane he was constituted arch-presbyter of the English clergy at Rome, and by Pope Clement the eighth, notary of the apostolic see, in the year 1598. He was intimately connected with Garnet, provincial of the jesuits in England. See Camd. Elizab. p. 900. edit. Hearn. His works, recited by Wo d, are learned, and were much esteemed by those of his persuasion. He is mentioned more than once by Casaubon, as the friend and coadjutor of Garnet, in a long epistle which contains many curious anecdotes of Garnet's history, not elsewhere to be found. Casaub. Epistol.—Epist. 624. Frontoni Duc. Dat. ondin. 1611. edit. 1656. p. 762, 796. He returned to England in 1607, and died in London 1612. [Schol. Ma 27, 1562. Soc. Jun. 18, 1565. Com. Middl.], and Thomas

Allen, the famous mathematician and antiquarian, but because he left his fellowship about the

year 1566, when he must have been called, by the statutes of his house, to take OrdersComp Burd coll. Trin. 1566-7.. It is not improbable, that he retired to Gloucester hall, or Hart-hall; both which places, particularly the first, were the receptacles, about this time, of such fellows of colleges, as could not, on account of their private attachment to popery, consistently or conscientiously retain their fellowships. I find him, about the year 1570, visiting Trinity college with Leonard Fitzimmonds, mentioned below, who had

quitted his fellowship of that college, and retired to Hart hall, for this reasonAs did Thomas Allen, above-mentioned, to Gloucester-hall,  his Life by Campbell, in the Biographia Brit. vol. .  Hearne's L N SCACC. Praefat. p. xxx. §. x. And Wood. ACH. OXON. i. col. 54, 106, 174, 467, 485. F. 248. Allen gave some manuscripts to the Bodleian library. One of them is vitate Dei, to which is added Gregorii Moralia in . MSS. Bodl. 198. The history of this venerable volume is curious, and deserves to be developed at large. It is beautifully written on vellum in folio; and originally belonged to Robert Grosthead bishop of Lincoln in the thirteenth century, in whose hand are many notes in the margins. Grosthead gave it to the convent of Friars Minors at Oxford. These Friars gave it to the famous theologist Thomas Gascoigne, under their seal, about the year 1433. Gascoigne presented it to Durham college at Oxford, and at length Allen placed it in the Bodleian library. At the end of this manuscript there is a long note written by Gascoigne, which Tanner has printed, Bibl. p. 311. All the books belonging to the library of Richard de Bury in Durham college, were dispersed soon after the dissolution of that house. Some were removed to the Humfredian library, and others to Baliol college; but the greater part became the property of Doctor Owen, to whom Durham college was granted. Archbishop Parker procured many Saxon manuscripts of Doctor Owen. In the Cotton library, there is a volume consisting of a collection of charters, and other antient writings, transcribed by Jocelyn, Parker's chaplain: who has inserted this note at many of the pieces. The archbishop of Canterbury had this charter from Dr. Owen. At some others, The copy of this Dr. Tallot had of Dr. Owen. VITELL. D. 7. Robert Talbot, the annotator on Antoninus, was employed by the archbishop to collect antient manuscripts, chiefly Saxon. Many of Parker's books, now in Bennet college library at Cambridge, appear to have belonged to Talbot. The archbishop's principal collector was Bateman, another of his chaplains; who says, that he "gathered within four years, under his graces commission, six thousand seven hundred books." Bateman's DOOM warning all men to judgment, &c. Lond. 1581. 4to. pag. 400. It should not be forgotten here, that Thomas Langley bishop of Durham, by will dated Dec. 17. 1437, gave a large legacy of books to the library of Durham college. Wharton ANGL. SACR. i. p. 776. As did John Longland bishop of Lincoln, who died in 1547. Tanner, BIBL. 485. But the college was dissolved, before that bequest could take place. I should speak here of Bury. This prelate was one of the earliest English restorers of literature. Of his PHILOBIBLON, I have spoken at large in the SECOND DISSERTATION prefixed to the first volume of the HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY. He held some of the highest offices both in church and state under Edward the third, whose education he had superintended. In the year 1331, he was sent by that king to Avignon, to negotiate some business with the pope. Rymer, FOED. ii. 59. He there lodged in the house of cardinal Colonne, where Petrarch at that time also resided. Petrarch embraced the fortunate opportunity of consulting this learned Englishman, then only a private ecclesiastic, about the situation of the antient Thule, supposed to be one of the British islands: for the geography of antiquity was one of Petrarch's favorite studies. Being without his books, of which he had amassed a prodigious collection, he promised to transmitt to Petrarch the best information he could obtain on this subject, after his return to England. What had immediately given rise to Petrarch's curiosity about this island, probably was Giraldus's fabulous account of Thule, in his MIRABILIA HIBERNIAE, a work just published, and recently translated into French by John of Meun, author of the Romaunt de la Rose. Petrarch wrote frequently to Richard of Bury to know the result of his promised enquiries about Thule: but, perhaps in consequence of Bury's important occupations, never received any answer. See Petrarchae EPISTOL. iii. 1. In this epistle, Petrarch calls Bury, "Virum ardentis ingenii nec literarum inscium, abditarumque rerum supra fidem curiosum." The ingenious author of LA VIE DE PETRARQUE, thinks that Petrarch's letters to Bury are now in some library of England. Tom. i. Liv. ii. p. 169. Amst. 1764. 4to. I have searched for this treasure, but without success. See Wharton, ANGL. SACR. i. 765. Leland and his transcriber Trithemius are mistaken in what they have asserted about Petrarch's correspondence with this prelate. From what is here said, may be also corrected two slight mistakes in the French ENCYCLOPEDE, under the article BIBLIOTHEQUE.."Alloc. pro epulis Mag. Saltmarshe et Mag. Fitzimmonds, xxd"Comp. Burss. ut supr. 1569-70..7. JOHN HARRYS.Born in Gloucestershire. Related to the founderFrom the will of Edmund Hutchins, mentioned in the next article.. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon as above, Aet. 17. Admitted probationer fellow on Trinity Sunday, 1559MSS. Kettel.. He left the college about the latter end of the same yearIbid..8. EDMUND HUTCHINS.Born in Oxfordshire. the founder's nephew, and one of his heirsSee supr. p. 122. 168. In a letter to the president without date, from Tyttenhanger, he says, "I beseech you see tha Mr. Basford and Huchyns applye their studye.". Admitted scholar of Trin coll. Oxon. Octob, 3, 1556, by the founders mandateRegistr. coll. fol. iii. b. "per authoritatem et mandatun venerabilis viri dom. Thomae Pope militis, coll. praedicti fundatoris, ad supplendum octonarium in eodem collegio numerum, ascitus." He is placed here on account of the last mentioned circumstance. For the time of his admission does not strictly correspond with that of the seven preceding.,

Aet. 22. He quitted the college about Christmas 1558MSS. Kettel.. He lived at Dumbleton in Gloucestershire, where he was Lord of the Manor, and married the Daughter of Thomas Cockes, esquireAtkyns's Gloucestershire, p. 406.. By his will, dat Jan. 28. 44 Eliz. and proved soon afterwards, he left to Trinity college aforesaid the advowson to the church of Dumbleton. Also estates, worth per ann. 33l. 6s. 8d. part of which the said college was annually to pay to certain charitable uses, and to have the residueIn Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon.. But his coheirs claiming the premisses, the whole benefaction was set aside by a decree of chanceryRegistr. prim. fol. 124. b. et chartis in Thesauriar. antedict.—His pedegree is in Mus. Ashmol. Codd. Ashm. 836. pag. 67.. He left besides, other charitable bequests to places with which he was connected. He was a benefactor to the library, in 1592. On a buttress, on the south side of the collegeFacing the north-side of the Chapel of Baliol college., the following memorial of him remains, cut in the stone. "Jesu have M. O. E. HUTCHINS." 1558. i. e. Jesus have meryc on Edmund Hutchins.Afterwards, as places became vacant, the FOUNDER nominated the five following SCHOLLARSOne of whom he nominated to a fellowship... . . . PIGGOTT.No notice of him occurs in the register. But such a person was scholar 1557Comp. Burss. 1556-7. See supr. p. 366., and I presume was nominated by the founder; who mentions him with great regard in a letter to the president, dat. Whitmonday,"1558. Understandinge. . . that sir Pigott woll at Trynite Sunday next yeld upp his ffellowship [scholarship] and neverthelesse desireth to remayne in the college as a sojorner; I have thought good, for that he is honest and a vertuos yong man, to desire you he may remayne in his chamber as a sojorner, and that he be well entreatyd in everye condition: for to be playne with you, I entende assoone as he shall be priest, to have hym in my house iff I maye." And again, in another to the same, dat. 25 May, 1558. "Iff Pigott depart, then may the pore boye for whom the bishopp of Bristowe's chanceller maketh sute, be preferryd to his rome: but in any case let Pigott be a comoner in the house." Accordingly he quitted the foundation, 1558.WALTER BLOUNT.Born at Blount's Hall, in Staffordshire. The founder's nephew. Admitted scholar Jan. 9, 1556.

Aet. 18Registr. coll. fol. 4.. He left the college about Michaelmas, 1558MSS. Kettel. See supr. p. 204.. This was the last instance in which the founder ordered any person to be admitted, except at the statutable time of election. Concerning which he tells the president in a letter, dat. 27 Nov. 1556. "When my wiffs brother is ons placed, I woll for no man's sute the statutes of my college be broken in that poynt: and that the election shall alwaies be uppon Trynytie Sonday." One Gualter Blount, esquire, is returned a Justice of the peace for Worcestershire, "as very honest and religious," among the rest of that county, by Freake the bishop, to the lord Treasurer, Oct. 6, 1587Strype Ann. Ref. iii. App. 174. One Walter Blount occurs a seminary priest, 1588. Ibid. p. 260..RICHARD SOUTHERN.Born at Exeter. Admitted scholar on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558. Aet. 16Registr. fol. 68. b.. I presume he was a relation of Thomas Southern, the treasurer of Exeter cathedral, mentioned above. In a letter to the president, dat. 27, Nov. 1556, the founder says, "Mr. Sowtherne shall have his scholler placed as sone as any rome [place] is voyd, and one man sped to whom I have made promyse." And in another to the same, dat. 24 Jul. 1557, he says,
"I am sorye to here your vice-president is sick, but I hope in god he shall shortly rere his helth; for which as I shall pray, so I requyre you tell hym, I am content young Sowtherne shall be at the scoler's commens, his ffrends peyinge for the same, till he can be placyd in my collegge." He left the college, 1560.FRANCIS BUTLER.Born at Bristol. Admitted scholar the same day. Aet. 17Registr. ibid.. The founder, beside what is mentioned in the article of Piggott, mentions him in a letter to the president, dated Whitmonday preceding, "I will that the pore scholer of Bristow, for whom Mr. DalbyWilliam Dalby was presented to the rectory of Littleton, Bristol. Dioces. 1556. He was made prebendary of Bristol, 1558, being then chancellor of that diocese. He was ejected from his preferments by Q. Elizabeth. Rym. Foed. xv. 450. And Willis, Cathedr. Bristol. p. 788. The bishop of Bristol was Holyman, mentioned above, p. 400.. . . labor, be admytted. Mr. Dalbye is the bisshoppes chanceller, and a man to whom I am beholdinge; and the pore man he laboreth for is very towardlye, and his ffryndes not habell to fynde hym to scole." He left the college 1560MSS. Kettel.. The sudden departure of this person, and some others, about this time, it may be supposed, was owing to the change of religion at the accession of queen Elizabeth.LEONARD FITZSYMONS.Born at DublinRegistr. prim. coll. Trin. fol. 4.. Was chapel-clerk of C. C. C. OxonWood, Ath. Oxon i. 199.. Being a native of Ireland, he was, from thence, admitted scholar, not only by the nomination, but by the dispensation, of the founder, on Trinity Sunday above-mentioned, and at the earnest suit of Thomas Marshall, the second dean of Christchurch, in 1558, aged seventeenRegistr. ut supr. And MSS. F. Wise. Marshall had been a fellow of C. C. C. Oxon.. He took the degree of A.B. the next year, 1559, May 8Wood, ubi supr. F. 88.. By the same authority, without having passed through the usual year of probation, he was admitted actual fellow, on Trinity Sunday, June 9, 1560It is said in the Register, "per dispensationem venerabilis et praepotentis militis Thomae Pope." fol. 26.. He took the degree of M.A. May 4, 1563. But being averse to the rites and Orders of the church of England, he retired to Hart-hall about 1571Rather 1570., and afterwards became a popish priestWood, ubi supr. And F. 92.. Hollinshed, from Stanihurst, calls him "a deepe and pithie clerke, well seene in the Greeke and Latine tongue, sometime fellow of Trinitie colledge in Oxford, perfect in the mathematicals,

and a paynefull student in divinitieChron. vol. i. p. 41. c. vii. Stanihurst's words are "profundus clericus, qui utrasque linguas, theologiam et mathematicam, admodum calluit et coluit." Descript. Hibern. cap. vii.." Wood acquaints us, that he was eminent for his learning in Ireland in 1580, and that he published several pieces, the titles of which are unknown. He seems to have died in Ireland, where he probably spent the latter part of his lifeWood, ubi supr. i. 199. And Tanner, Bibl. p. 285.. He had a brother educated at Cambridge, and afterwards beneficed in IrelandStanihurst, ubi supr.. To mathematics he joined a knowledge of music, as appears from the following article in Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1561-2."Solut. dom. Fitzsimmons pulsanti organa per annum, xxsThe statutable salary, although he was a fellow of the college. In consequence of the dissolution of the monasteries, and of the reformation of religion, church music received an almost irreparable blow. Few were then educated at least to the mechanical part of the profession; and when the splendor of the popish worship was restored, after a long intermission, by queen Mary, it was difficult to procure instrumental practitioners, properly qualified to assist at the solemnities of the mass. Under these circumstances in order to facilitate and secure so precarious an acquisition, Sir Thomas Pope found it necessary to provide in his statutes, that there should be constantly one person admitted into the society, competently skilled in music, who might be able to execute the office of organist to the college. That this was the case, the provision itself seems to imply; as well as the reason which the founder expressly suggests for it, and the manner in which it is worded. "Hic autem, quoniam opus est, et maxime convenit, ut per hanc electionem provideatur nequando dictum Collegium ORGANORUM PULSATORE sit destitutum, nec talis ubique inveniri possit facile, liberam dictis electoribus potestatem facio et permitto, unum aliquem talem de quocunque possint loco eligendi, qui ludendi organis peritus, et in grammaticae etiam rudimentis competenter eruditu, in dictorum scholarium numerum, modo sit pauper, admittatur; et organa in dictis festis, aliasque in officiis divinis, more in ecclesiis consueto, pulsare tenebitur: nisi Sociorum quisquam id praestare muneris melius noverit et poterit." STATUT. coll. Trin. cap. vii. In the Additament, where the salary mentioned in the text is assigned, he is likewise obliged, "Scholares ad cantandum in choro idoneos reddere."I am not in the mean time ignorant, that antiently in our foundations of churches and colleges, no separate or distinct officer, by the name of organist, was ever appointed. This duty was subordinate, and appears to have been commonly performed by one of the clerks. In the statutes of Corpus Christi college at Oxford, given in 1517, two chapel-clerks are established, one of whom is also to be the Organorum pulsator. Cap. xvii. The first instance of the mention of an Organ in any collegiate statutes which I have had the opportunity to examine, occurs in those of Eton college, made about the year 1440. Where one of the four clerks who is appointed to instruct the choristers, is moreover ordered jubilare organis. Cap. x. Here also, for the first time, Cantus organicus is mentioned. In the new cathedral-foundations of king Henry the eighth, a master or teacher of the finging-boys is appointed: and besides, he is to be "cantandi, et organa pulsandi, peritus." Statut. Eccles. Roffens. dat. A.D. 1545. Cap. xxii. At New college Oxford, King's at Cambridge, and Winchester-college, in each of which are ample choirs, there is no provision by statute, not even for an Informator Choristarum. Although such an officer occurs in the early rolls of New-college. At Magdalen college Oxford, founded about the year 1459, there is also no mention of an organist: but it is enjoined that one of the chaplains, or clerks, or some other skillful person, shall educate the choristers in the plain chant and pricked song. Cardinal Wolsey in the statutes of his college at Oxford, given 1525, mentions a music-master, not by the name of an organist, who is to be musicae peritissmus. MSS. JAMES, vol. vii. p. 89. Bibl. Bodl. In the year 1446, the abbot and convet of Muchelney in Somersetshire, granted a corrody of five marks, with seven gallons of ale, and seven loaves called le old myches, every week, and a gown and four loads of wood annually, to Ralph Drake cantor, or chanter, pro servitio nobis in illa sciencia musica; and on condition, that he attend the choir every day, and teach four boys, and one of the monks, or as many as chose, to play on the organ. Hearne's AD. DOMERH. vol. 1. APPEND. PRAEF. p. lxxxii. edit. Oxon. 1727. In a catalogue of the service-books of saint Paul's cathedral, taken in the year 1295, Liber Organorum occurs more than once. Dugd. Hist. p. 220. By which, I believe, we are not to understand any species of music-books for that instrument. The Organ was so essential a circumstance of divine worship, that the mass, and other holy offices, were called Organum. Charpentier, SUPPL. Gloss. Lat. Du Cange. tom. iii. p. 89. in V.To recur to the first part of this note. There is a curious passage in Erasmus's Annotations on the New Testament, written about the year 1512, which admirably displays the state of our church-music, just before the Reformation, EPIST. Corinth. i. xiv. 19. [Opp. Tom. vi. C. 731. N. 26.] "We have introduced into the churches, a certain elaborate and theatrical species of music, accompanied with a tumultuous diversity of voices. All is full of trumpets, cornets, pipes, fiddles, and singing. We come to church as to a play-house. And for this purpose, ample salaries are expended on organists, and societies of boys, whose whole time is wasted in learning to sing. Not to mention the vast revenues which the church squanders away in the stipends of singing-men, who are commonly great drunkards, buffoons, and chosen from the lowest of the people. These fooleries are become so agreeable, that the monks, especially in ENGLAND, think of nothing else. To this end, even in the Benedictine MONASTERIES OF ENGLAND, many youths, boys, and other vocal performers, are sustained; who, early every morning, sing to the organ the mass of the Virgin Mary with the most harmonious modulations of voice. And the bishops are obliged to keep choirs of this sort in their families.".
{inverted ⁂} In the year 1559, nine scholars were admitted; and in the same year, the founder's institution of four ADDITIONAL scholars took place. My foregoing list of the first eight, would have been incomplete, without some mention of the first four ADDITIONAL scholars; which are included in the following nine scholarsIt is remarkable, that no mention is made at all of the four first, in the college register: nor of the scholarships of four others, (fellows) afterwards mentioned. This defect, as will appear by the references, I have supplied from Registr. Kettel. Which is founded on evidences equally authentic, and still remaining., admitted in the year 1559: concerning each of which, I shall therefore subjoin an account, however short and imperfect.LEONARDE PERSEY, [or Piercic.]He left the college, 1562MSS. Kettel. Not in Registr. coll... . . WOOD.He left the college, 1560Ibid. Not in Reg... . . DOWLE, [or Dowlie.]He left the college the same yearIbid. Not in Reg... . . . PRINCE.He left the college, 1562Ibid. Not in Reg..RICHARD BASSETMSS. Kettel. ex Comp. burss. 2. non in registr. ut schol..Born in Yorkshire. Afterwards admitted probationer fellow, by nomination of the foundress, Jun. 4, 1561Registr. fol. 27..CHRISTOPHER WHARTONMSS. Kettel. ut supr. non in registr. ut schol..Born in Yorkshire. Afterwards admitted probationer fellow by nomination, and dispensation, of the foundress, his county being full, May 26, 1562"Qui virtute literarum domine fundatricis admissus erat, alias admitti non potuit ex eo quod numerus ejusdem comitatus erat completus. Registr. fol. 26. b.. Soon afterI find the following entry in Registr. cur. cancell. Oxon. GG. supr. citat. fol. 89. "Nomina [cum tutoribus] scholasticorum degentium in domibus privatis, 1562.—Bartholomaeus Chamberlayne, dominus Wharton tutor." Bartholomew Chamberlayne was perhaps a fellow of Trinity college afterwards, mentioned p. 195, 196. And his tutor, the subject of this article. These tutors did not live with their pupils in the private houses; the latter attended upon the former, who for the most part were fellows of colleges, occasionally for instruction, &c. the year 1564, he left his fellowship,

being averse to the religion and orders of the church of England; and retiring to the college at Doway, an expedient not uncommon at this time, was made a catholic priest. He then returned to England, and officiated in that character; being in high reputation and esteem for his learning and piety, among those of his own persuasionSee Thoresby's Leedes. p. 521.. At length being imprisoned for the public exercise of his proscribed function, and for disclaiming the queen's supremacy, he was executed at York, in the sixtieth year of his age, Mar. 28. 1600Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. F. p. 93. col. 1. And Worthington's Catalogus Martyrum pro Religione Catholica in Anglia occisorum. Edit. 1614. 8vo. pag. 43. where he is called, "Collegii Duaci alumnus.".JOHN HALSEYMSS. Kettel. ut supr. non in registr. ut schol., [or Haulsei.]Born in Hertfordshire. I find him nominated one of the first fellows of St. John's college Oxford, by the founder, sir Thomas Whyte, in his charter, dated Mar. 28, 1557-8Wood, Hist. antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 303. col. 2. And Catal. soc. coll. di. Jo. Bapt. Oxon. per Griffin Higges. MSS. Mus. Ashmol. F. 28. fol. 204. supra citat., at which time he seems to have

been convictor, or commoner, in Trinity collegeWood, ut supr.. It appears, however that he did not accept of this offer at St. John's college, being elected scholar of Trinity college, the following year, 1559. Afterwards admitted probationer fellow of the same, May 26, 1562Registr. ut supr. fol. 26. b..EDWARD TREWELMSS. Kettel. ex Comp. 2. Burss. ut supr. non in Registr. ut supr..Born in Hertfordshire. Afterwards admitted probationer fellow, by nomination of the foundress, Jun. 9, 1560Registr. ut supr. fol. 26..THOMAS ORPEWOODEMSS. Kettell. ut supr..Born in Oxfordshire. The founder's nephew or near relationSee p. 327.. Afterwards admitted probationer fellow, by nomination of the foundress, Jun. 6, 1563Registr. ut supr. fol 3. "Ex nominatione piae ac venerabilis dominae Pope, uxoris Thomae Pope militis, Fundatoris jam defuncti." Although she was now married to sir Hugh Paulet..NUMB. XXVI. Account of the Marriages, and Descendants, of John Pope, of Wroxton, esquire.JOHN POPE, only brother to sir Thomas Pope, was settled at Wroxton in Oxfordshire, in or before the reign of Edward the sixth; where he was buried Jun. 24, 1583Registr. parochial. de Wroxton, co. Oxon. See also Registr. PARRET, (citat. supr. Numb. xxi.) fol. 6. b. fol. 3. a.. He was married thrice. His first wife, was, as I conjecture, Anne StaveleyEx testamento Dom. T. Pope., daughter of — Staveley of BignellConcerning this family of Staveley, I find that William Staveley, lord of the manor of Bignell, who died 1498, bequeathes his body to be buried in the church of Bicester, co. Oxon. and was a benefactor to Bicester priory. By Alice his wife he had George, William, John, Mary, and Isabell. The said George, 16 Hen. viii. leaves provision for certain masses, &c. in University college. Kennet's PAROCH. ANTIQ. p. 680. seq. And Wood Hist. antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 59. col. 2. Willis recites an epitaph to Thomas Giffard of Twiford, co. Bucks, marrying Mary, daughter of William Staveley of Bignell, who died 1450. Hist. of Bucks, p. 335. One of the name is buried in Bicester church, with the date 1485. What is here said of the Staveley family, corrects a passage in Leland, ITIN. vii. fol. 8. "There is buried in the quier of the paroche churche of Burcester, one William Standley, esquier, lord of Bygnelle, &c." Read Staveley. I take this opportunity of observing that Leland mentions sir T. Pope twice, Itin. vol. iv. P. ii. pag. 91, 59. edit. 1744.
in the said county. She died before 1554Ex indentur. quadripartit. supr. citat., and was buried in St. Stephen's, WallbrookSee p. 167.; leaving one daughter, Elizabeth, to whom sir Thomas Pope bequeathed 300 marks for her portion in marriageEx testam. dom. T. P., and who married, 1573, Edward Blount, of Burton upon Trent in StaffordshireFrom articles of agreement relating thereto, dat. Febr. 15. 14 Eliz.—Edward Blount occurs in dame Eliz. Paulet's will, and, I suppose, was her nephew.. The said John Pope's second wife was ElizabethLee's MSS. Visitat. ut supr. pag. 32. And from other evidences., daughter of sir John Brockett, of Brockett-Hall at Hatfield in HertfordshireSee Chauncy's Hertf. p. 312. John Brockett receives, with others, parcell of the possessions of St. Bartholomew's priory in London, at the dissolution. Ibid. 324. Sir John Brockett, knt. is member of parliament for Hertsordshire, 1553. Willis, Not. parl. ed. ii. p. 27. He was knighted 1 Edw. vi. Feb. 22. MSS. Cotton. Claud. C. 3. fol. 172. b., to whom he was married before 1554She is mentioned in Indentur. quadripartit. supr. citat.. His third wife was Jane, daughter of sir Edmund

Wyndham, of Somersetshire, by whom he had no issueShe is buried in the church of Fellbridge in Norfolk, with this epitaph. "Here lieth the bodie of Jane Conningsbie, widdowe, and one of the daughters of sir Edmond Windham, knt. deceased: first married to John Pope in the countie of Oxford, esquire, and after his decease to Humphrie Conningsbie, esquire. She departed this life without issue of her bodie, the xx daie of November, in the yeare of our Lord 1608, and of her age 67." The said Humphrie Conningsbie was of Hampton-court, co. Hereford. She must have been married to John Pope between 1573 and 1583. See CAT. of Mr. West's Books, p. 220. Num. 4299..But by the second wife, Elizabeth Brockett, the said John Pope had issue three sons, Thomas, George, and William; and six daughters, Georgia, Penelope, Mary, Susannah, Anne, and JaneLee's MSS. Visit. ut supr.—Registr. Wroxton.—Registr. in 4to. in Thesauriar. coll. Trin.—And MSS. Pedigr. Rawlins.. Thomas died an infant 1564Registr. Wroxton.. George appears to have studied one year under the tuition of John SellarB.D. Afterwards in 1597 rector of Ickford in Buckinghamshire., in Trinity college, Oxford, which he left May 3, 1587, having been admitted in the rank of convictor primi ordinisEx registr. quodam in 4to. in Thes. coll. Trin. supr. citat.. But he died soon afterwards. The only surviving son, and heir, William, in 1573Registr. Wroxton., and at fourteen years of age, was admitted, a convictor primi ordinis, into the aforesaid college, Jul. 7,

1587, which he quitted April 12, 1591Ex Registr. in 4to ut supr.. He was entered a student in Gray's-Inn, 1594MSS. Harl. 1912. pag. 60.. On the arrival of James the I. in England, he was created in the great gallery of St James's palace, Jul. 24, 1603, a knight of the bathThe ceremony of this creation is thus described by Howes, Stowe's continuator. "Sunday the twenty-foure [1603] was performed the solempnity of knights of the bath riding honorably from St. James to the courte, and made shewe with their squires and pages about the Tilte-yarde; and after went into the parke of St. James, and there lighted all from their horses, and went uppe to the king's majesties presence in the gallerie where they received the order of knighthood of the bathe." Stowe's Ann. by Howes, pag. 827. But see Anstis, who says this creation was on the day of the king's coronation, viz. Jul. 25. Knighthood of the Bath, App. pag. 57.There is an old play addressed to this sir WILLIAM POPE, written by Barnaby Barnes. It is a tragedy, entitled the DEVIL's CHARTER, on the story of pope Alexander the sixth; acted before James the first on Candlemas night, and printed Lond. 1607. quarto. "Dedicated to the honourable and his verie deare friends sir W. Herbert, and sir W. Pope, knights, associates in the noble order of the Bath." This author Barnes wrote Four books of OFFICES about Princes, &c. Lond. 1606, fol. Also A divine century of spiritual sonnets, Lond. 1595. Sir William Herbert, here mentioned, was afterwards earl of Pembroke, and Chancellor of the university of Oxford. He was himself a writer of poetry, and published a book of poems. Some of his sonnets were set to music by Henry Lawes. Pembroke college is named after him.: and on May 22, 1611, a baronet, by the style of sir William Pope

of WilcottWilliam Pope of Wilcott, occurs high-sheriff of Oxfordshire, 43 Eliz.—Fuller's Worth. pag. 344. edit. 1662. The manor of Wilcott, or Wivilcote, is said by Plott to have been antiently the head of a barony; and he supposes that one of its barons is buried in the neighbouring church of Northieigh. See Plott's Oxf. ch. x. §. 134. p. 154. But the person there interred, with his wise, both whose recumbent figures, large as life, and richly habited, are on a beautiful alabaster tomb within an elegant chantry, is . . . . Wilcotes, or Willycotes, esquire. They have both a collar of esses, but no baronial badges: and from the style of the architecture, I take this chautry not to be older than Henry the sixth. The family were indeed lords of the manor of Wilcott; and they were of great note in Oxfordshire, but now long since extinct. See Kennet's Paroch. Antiq. p. 561. 527. Their escocheon was an eagle's head with wings. The two figures on the tomb just mentioned, which are as large as life, I take to be John and Alicia Wilcott, whose daughter Elizabeth married into Raynesford of Great-Tew in this county, and whose arms appeared in the windows of the manorhouse there, with this remarkable inscription. "Iohn Wylcotes et alicia uror ejus, ob. 1400 et Temel." i. e. 1401. or 1410. Leland says, "WIVELCOTE, alias WILCOTE, a knight that was owner of the lordship of Tew, and dwelled in the maner place there, is buried in a faire tumbe of marble in Tewe churche." ITIN. iv. f. 16. pag. 14. edit. 1744. Compare Hearne's TROKELOWE, Append. p. 329. 334. In the church of Great Tew, if I recollect right, there is a tomb, perhaps the same, with the Cross of Raynesford and the Eagle of Wilcott. in OxfordshireDugd. Antient use of bearing arms, &c. 1682. pag. 82.. Afterwards, Octob. 16, 1629Pat. Car. I. an. reg. 4. part 39., he was made by Charles I. baron of Bellturbett, and earl of Downe, in Ireland. On occasion of the last mentioned dignity, supporters were

granted to the antient coat by Segar, otherwise garter king at arms, on the twenty-third of December followingMSS. F. Wise.. He died Jul. 2, 1631Ex tumul. apud Wroxton., at Wroxton, and was buried in the church, on the north side of the altar, under an alabaster monument of elegant and costly workmanship, on which are the recumbent figures of himself and his lady, large as life. This monument was made by Nicholas StoneFrom Mr. Vertue.. He left by will to Trinity college, Oxford, one hundred poundsComp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1630-1. Bursariis Antonio Farrington et GULIELMO CHILLINGWORTH., and a beautiful edition of Ortelius's Geography, printed 1584Ex lib. benefactor. Liblioth. coll. Trin.. He married in 1595, or in the year followingSee Collins, Peer. iii. p. 60. ed. i., Anne, daughter of sir Owen Hopton, lieutenant of the tower of London, and relict of Henry lord Wentworth, baron of NettlesteadMSS. pedigr. Rawlins. And from empalements in painted glass at Wroxton. At the same place there is a fine old portrait of sir Owen Hopton, dated 1590. His daughter, Anne landy Wentworth, as mentioned in the text, had by her former husband, lord Wentworth, two sons, Thomas and Henry. They were both sent together to Trinity college, Oxford, and matriculated Novemb. 12, 1602. Thomas, lord Wentworth, being 11, and his brother Henry 8 years of age. Collectan. e lib. Matric. MSS. A. Wood. Mus. Ashm. D. 1. In the college-computus of that year, viz. 1601-2, I find the following entry. "Sol. pro chirothecis magistri Pope, xxxijs." This, I suppose, was a compliment to their father-in-law William Pope, when he brought the boys to the college. Thomas, now fourteen years old, appeared among the young nobility of the university, in the choir of Christ church cathedral, before James the first and his queen, in the year 1605. Wake's REX PLAT. p. 35. edit. 1607. In 1610, he was made knight of the Bath, at the creation of prince Henry. He was in high favour with James I. And by Charles I. with whom he was in equal esteem, he was created earl of Cleveland. His loyalty and intrepidity make a conspicuous figure in the grand rebellion. Dugd. BAR. iii. 310. col. 2. Lady Anne, abovementioned, also by her first husband left a daughter, Jane, married to sir John Finett, knight, of Westkele in Kent, who was sent an envoy into France, 1619, and knighted the next year. In 1626, he was constituted master of the ceremonies to Charles the first, having been assistant-master in the foregoing reign, during which office, he wrote a book, now very scarce, entit. FINETTI PHILOXENIS, Some choice observations, &c. which contains a curious description of the ceremonies of an age of ceremony. See Collins, ut supr.—Birch's Pr. Henry, p. 192.—Wood's Ath. Oxon. i. F. 270.—See also the PHILOXENIS, p. 167, 199. edit. 1656. 8vo. This book has been translated into German.At lord Guilford's, abovementioned, there is a picture large as life, of Anne lady Wentworth, and her three children, Thomas, Henry, and Jane, which she had by her first husband, lord Wentworth. It is painted by Vansomer, 1596. She died at Wroxton, and

was buried there May 10, 1625Registr. Wroxton.. In the reign of James I. the said William, lord Downe, built a large mansion-house at Cogges in Oxfordshire, now partly standing, on the site and ruins of the priory, dissolved by Henry VIMSS. Wood, Mus. Ashm. E. 1. 4to. p. 45.. He likewise built from

the ground, and finished in the year 1618Date ibid. in the hall.—In the year 1600, I find him living at Hook-norton,  Oxon. Ex chart in thesaur. cell. praedict. This was in a house built by the Brandons dukes of Suffolk. The manor of Hook-norton now belonging to the bishoprick of Oxford, was granted to sir Thomas Pope, by Pa. 1. Mar. regin. Test. Jn. 2. par. 5. "Cum pertintiis in com. Oxon. .", the present mansion-house at Wroxton; where his love of the Arts appears in the east-window of of the chapel, the glass of which he caused to be decorated, in 1623, by Van LingFrom the window., with histories from the new testament, and family ArmsAmong the beautiful fragments of old painted glas, with inscriptions, in lord Temple's Gothic temple, at , is a pane inscribed sir WILLIAM POPE and AE Ho; which, I suppose, came from this .. At this place, but probably in the old abbey houseWhich stood in the Garden on the east side of the present house., he was visited by James I. in a progress; where he entertained the king with the fashionable and courtly diversions of hawking and bear-baiting. At the same time his lady having been lately delivered of a daughter, the babe was presented to the king, holding the following humorous epigram in her hand, with which his majesty was highly pleasedIt is supposed to have been written by Dr. Richard Corbet the a young  of Christ Church, Oxon. afterwards Bishop of Norwich. "In 1605, he was  out of the 
in the university, tempore, shewed. Afterwards entering into holy Ordere, he became a most quaint preacher, and therefore much followed by . At length being made one of the chaplains to his majesty king James the first, who highly raied him for his fine fancy and preaching, , was by his  promoted, &c." WOOD,  Oxon. i. col. . Corbet, however, was a man of real wit, and possessed a vein of high humour, which would have pleased a more delicate  than that of James. His POLTICA  were printed in 1647..See this little mistres here,Did never sit in Peter's chaire,Or a triple crowne did weare;And yet she is a Pope.No benefice she ever sold,Nor did dispence with sin's for gold;She hardly is a sev'nnight old,And yet she is a Pope.No king her feet did ever kisse,Or had from her worse look than this:Nor did she ever hope,To saint one with a rope;And yet she is a Pope.A female Pope youll say, a second Joan;No sure—she is POPE Innocent or noneFuller's WORTHIES, LONDON, pag. 223. Ed. 1662. At Wroxton there is a very curious picture of prince Henry while a boy. The date is 1603, and the prince's age is marked 11. But he was then only 9. Vertue could not discover the printer. He is represented large as life,  the  of a stag after hunting. At some little distance is sir John Harrington, a youth, the prince's intimate friend, as appears by his arms hung up in a tree. This piece was probably painted to compliment some boyish atchievement in hunting performed by the prince; for, almost from his infancy, he was remarkably fond of hunting. In the great hall of the old royal palace at Woodstock, where he resided, there was preserved a prodigious pair of stag's horns, with an inscription importing that the stag was hunted and killed by prince Henry. Probably the prince accompanied the king at this visit..
Before I speak particularly of his Children, I return to his sisters above-mentioned. Of whom, Anne, the eldest, married John Spurling, esquire, of Baldock in HertfordshireMSS. Pedigr. of POPE, penes honoratiss. com. de Guildford.—In the herald's office, there are two or three pedigrees of this family. But they are in general false and defective. That which I have cited, as being among MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bedl. Manu A. Wood. seems to be taken from one of these. Perhaps the most correct one in that office, is G. 3. 26. OFFIC. ARM. They have been obligingly compared for me by Ralph Bigland, esquire, Somerset-herald, and examined by Mr. Astle of the Paper Office.. Georgia was born at Wroxton, 1563Registr. Wroxton. Where it is said that George Carleton, esquier, was her godfather. He was of Brightwell, in Oxfordshire, and related to this family by marrying Elisabeth, daughter of sir John Brockett, son of sir John Brockett, mentioned above. See Chauncy's Hertf, p. 313., and married Robert Raynesford, esquire, of Staverton in NorthamptonshireMSS. Wood, Mus. Ashmol. E. 1. pag. 115.. Jane, the third, married Francis Combes, esquire, of

Hempstead in HertfordshireMSS. pedigr. of POPE, penes honoratiss. com. de Guildford. Their son Francis Combe, was gentleman-commoner of Trinity college, Oxford, under the tuition of Mr. John Bowman, which he quitted in 1602. LIB. CAUT. in quarto. He was an elegant scholar, especially in the Greek tongue. The books which he left to Trinity college library, are a proof of his taste and learning. He died in 1641, and lies buried at Hempstead in Hertfordshire. See Salmon's HERTFORDSHIRE, pp. 95. 116. edit. fol. 1728. His numerous benefactions are recorded on his wife's monument in the southern chancel of the church of Abbats Langley in Hertfordshire.. Penelope was born 1568Registr. Wroxton. Where it is said that Edward Boughton was her godfather. He was of Lawford in Warwickshire, and married Susannah a daughter, as it seems, of the first sir John Brockett. Dugd. Warw. p. 66. From Chauncy it appears, that sir Nicholas Barrington, who died 1521, married Elisabeth, a daughter of sir John Brockett, afterwards married to William Boughton, esquire. Hertf. p. 367.. Mary was born 1569Registr. Wroxton. Her godfather, Anthony Bustard, to whom sir Thomas Pope bequeathes by will xl. He was the son of John Bustarde, second husband to sir Thomas Pope's mother Margaret, buried in a chapel on the south side of Adderbury church, near Deddington, in Oxfordshire, with this inscription on a large monument of stone. "Nere unto this tombe lyeth buried the bodyes of John Bustarde esquire and Elizabeth his wife, and Jane Bustarde wife to Anthonie Bustarde, son and heire to the said John: which John had by the saide Elizabethe xvii children. And the said John dyed anno dom. 1534. The said Elizabeth anno 1517, and the saide Jane anno 1568." Arms above. On a — between 3 roundells, 3 bustardes, a bord. ingr. The same impal. a cheveron ingr. between 3 unicorn's heads erased. See LIFE. p. 5. In the same church is a monument erected by the said Anthony to his daughter Mary, and her husband Edward More who died 1586. Of the daughters of the said John:—Joanne marries William Chauncey, esquire, of Edgcote, co. Northampt. who died 1585. She dies 1571. Hist of Northamptonsh. i. 119. Christian marries Edward Wilmot of Witney, co. Oxon. and, afterwards, William Bury of Culham, co. Berks. MSS. Wood, ut supr. E. 1. pag. 21. Anne marries Edward Frere, esquire, of the city of Oxford. See supr. p. 307. I find one John Bustarde, a subscribing witness to an instrument in Trinity college, Oxon. dat. Apr. 1. 22 Eliz. Also one John Bustarde of Oxfordshire, a fugitive for popery. Strype's Refermat. ii. App. 103. John Bustarde is also removed from New college, Oxon. 1560. Wood. Ant. 283. The father of John Bustarde, buried in Adderbury church, as above, if not the same, is perhaps John Bustarde mentioned in the will of Rich. Fox, of Bereford St. Michael's, co. Dorset. dat. May 31, 1502. In which the said Richard Fox leaves to the guild of Deddington, xxs. To buying a bell for ths church there, xijs. To the light of our lady of pity there, that is, of the holy virgin holding our saviour in her arms after his crucifixion, sometimes called the image of Pite, vjs. viijd. With other benefactions and bequests. The residue of his goods to be disposed of for his children by Rich. Fox, and JOHN BUSTARDE. Ex Registr. Blaymir. qu. 15. cur. praer. Cant Unless Dodynton in Somersetshire be here intended. The earliest notice I find of the name is in 7 Edw. ii. 1313, when one John Bustarde is pardoned as an adherent to Thomas earl of Lancaster, concerned in the death of Pierce Gaveston. Rym. Foed. iii. 444. Gaveston was detained a prisoner at Deddington for some days before his execution near Warwick. Dugd. Bar. ii. 44. One William Bustard, S.T.B who probably was of this family, was appointed one of the priests of the chantry of Guy-cliff, near Warwick, Jul. 29, 1520.—Priv. sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 11. Jul. 29. Also Robert Bustard is presented to the vicarage of Newenham by St. Alban's abbey, 24 Feb. 1468. Registr. Mon. S. Alban. John Bustard of Oxfordshire, appears as a fugitive for religion, about the middle of Elisabeth's reign. Peck's DESID. CURIOS. lib. ii. ad calc.—On mentioning the name of Freer in this note, I take this opportunity of inserting the following notice concerning William Freer, [see p. 307.] extractd from the Journal book of expences of building Cardinal Wolsey's college, now Christ Church, Oxford. MSS. Br. Twyne, notat. 8. archiv. Oxon. p. 351. It is ann. 20 Hen. viii. "Paid to William Freer of Oxford, for the new makinge, mendinge, and repairinge of the high waye leadinge between Bollshipton and THE CROSSE standing uppon Heddington-hills, for the more speedy conveyance of stone, tymber, and lyme, to be carried from sundrie places to the saide worke, over and above, xvl. paide by the handes of Mr. Nicholas Townly, master of the works, as by a booke of parcells thereof made by the saide William Freer, then being surveyour of the saide workes, doth plainly appear at large,—xxxivl. viijs. vd.". Susannah, the second,

was married, Nov. 12, 1583, to Daniel Danvers, of Culworth in NorthamptonshireRegistr. Wroxton..I now return to the issue of the aforesaid William Pope first earl of Downe, and his countess, Anne. These were two sons, William and Thomas: and one daughter, AnneInscript. sepulchral. ibid. Perhaps the infant presented to king James., who died, as appears, unmarried, and was buried at Wroxton, Jul. 13, 1629Registr. ibid.. As to the sons, William Pope, ancestor of Henry earl of Litchfield, was born at Wroxton, 1596Ibid.. He was knighted by James I. at the royal manor of Woodstock, Jul. 28, 1616MSS. Dugdale. Mus. Ashmol. R. fol. 215.. He was married,

1615, in St. Margaret's church Westminster, to ElisabethRegistr. Wroxton., eldest daughter of sir Thomas Watson, knight, of Halstead in KentA memorable benefactor to the church of Halstead, 1610: adorning it with a beautiful painted window, steeple, porch, &c. In the same church is a stone to the memory of lady Watson his wife, placed there by Thomas Pope, second earl of Downe, her grandson. See Harris's Kent, p. 141, 142. And Philpot's Villare Cant. p. 177. Whose mistakes are here corrected.. He died in 1624, while his father William was yet living, and was buried, Aug. 29, at WroxtonRegistr. Wroxton.. His relict afterwards married sir Thomas Pennistone, knight and baronet, of Cornwell in OxfordshireMSS. Pedigrees in Mus. Ashmol. fol. F. 2. pag. 102.. The said William and Elizabeth Pope had issue three sons, Thomas, William, and John; and two daughters, Anne and ElizabethEx Testamento Avi, Gulielmi Pope, dat. Dec. 31, 1630. when they were all living.. Anne born at Wroxton, 1617Registr. Wroxon., married sir Samuel Danvers, baronet, of Culworth aforesaidMSS. pedigr. Rawlins. ut supr. Collins is here corrected, Peer. ii. 383. Ed. i. And Hist. Northamptonshire, i. 164.. They had a son christened Pope, who gave a large embossed silver goblet to Trinity college, Oxford, which lately preserved the following Inscription. Ex dono Pope Danvers, filii unici Samuelis Danvers de Culworth in agro Northampton baronetti, ex matris parte Fundatoris consanguinei, et hujus collegii primi ordinis commensalis, an. dom. 1662. The younger sister, Elizabeth, born at Halstead, Decemb. 19, 1618Registr. Wroxton., was married to George Raleigh, esquire, of Farmborough in WarwickshireMSS. Pedigr. Rawlins.. To return to their Brothers above-mentioned, Thomas, William, and John. Of William I find no more than his name recited in his grandfather's will: and that he was born at Cogges, Jan. 11, 1624Registr. Cogges.. John was also born at Cogges Nov. 2, 1623, where his father residedRegistr. Wroxton. Mrs. [i. e. Lady] Elizabeth Pope of Cogges, occurs in 1636, in Registr. PARRET, [citat. supr. Numb. xxi.] fol. 106. b. This must have been their mother.. Of Thomas I must speak more at large, whom I therefore mention last.He was born at Cogges, 1622Registr. Wroxton.. At the age of nine years, on the death of his grandfather William, viz. Jul. 1631, he became a baronet, and second earl of Downe, by succession. He was educated at home under a careful tutorWood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 543.; and in June, 1639, was matriculated a nobleman of Christ Church,

OxfordMSS. Wood, collectan. e lib. matric. ut supr.—See also Laud's Chancellorship, p. 190. seq.. He married Lucy, daughter of John Dutton, esquire, of Sherborne in GloucestershireAnd not Elisabeth, as Wood says, Ath. Oxon. ubi supr. See Atkyns's Gloucestershire, p. 377, 378, 646. Elisabeth married John Colt, esquire. Atkyns, ibid.. She died Apr. 6, 1656, and lies buried in the church of Cubberley, near Cheltenham, in the said countyInscript. sepulchral. ibid.. Having suffered severely for his activity in the royal cause during the grand rebellion, insomuch that he was compelled to sell his house and estate at Cogges, he left the kingdom about the beginning of Cromwell's usurpationWhitelock mentions a fine imposed on the earl of Downe, by the parliament, assigned to the garrison at Abingdon, in 1645. Memor. p. 186. Other evidences specify a fine of 6000l. These confiscations were often granted to the presbyterian ministers, for the better support of enthusiastic prayer, and of sermons which had no end.: and making an advantage of his persecutions, took the opportunity of improving himself by visiting foreign countriesIn his distresses, Trinity college, Oxford, granted him sums of money, as appears by a schedule in the college-Treasury. "Mem. A.D. 1647, Given to the earl of Downe, post finitum COMPUTUM, by order of Mr. President and Officers, 145l. 13s. 4d." And in the following year, the college gave a present to sir Thomas Pope, knight, his UNCLE, afterwards a baronet, and in 1660, the third earl of Downe, hereaftermentioned, who was also a considerable sufferer in the royal cause. viz. COMP. BURSS. 1648. "Concess. domino Thomae Pope, xlvl." One is surprised at those donations, under the government of doctor Robert Harris, Cromwell's presbyterian President. But Harris was a man of candour, and I believe a majority of the old loyal fellows still remained.. About the time of the restoration he

returned home; and dying at OxfordMSS. Wood, ut supr. No. 8466. 4. pag. 100., Decemb. 28, 1660, was interred before the altar in the church of Wroxton, with the following inscription, which further illustrates his character, and confirms many particulars here mentiond.H. S. E.ILLUSTRISSIMUS DOM. DOMINUS THOMAS POPE, DE WILCOTT IN AGRO OXONIENSI BARONETTUS, BARO BELLTURBET, COMES DUNENSIS, IN HIBERNIA.Vir, in quo nihil desideres praeter vitam diuturnam: cui ad eximiam corporis elegantiam, et miram felicitatem ingenii, accessit morum integritas, et rerum scientia non vulgaris. In quo eminere posset erga patriam affectus, nisi quod par esset ejus in amicitiis fides. In omnibus recti et aequi observantissimus; super caetera, in regem pius. Quem postquam a perduellibus nefario bello lacessitum, justissimis sed male felicibus juvisset armis; afflictis jam domi rebus, in exteras regiones proficiscitur: Inter quas, ubi quae Europaei mundi humaniores sunt partes non incurius aut frustra perlustrasset; reversus in patriam, quum illic etiam serenissimum principem tanto patre dignum, Haeredem reducem vidisset laetus; saltem(quod unum reliquum erat) charissimae filiae dominae ElizabethaeBorn at Cogges, April 15, 1645. Registr. Cogges.cum domino Francisco Henrico Lee de Ditchley, baronetto, auspicatissimas feliciter celebrasset nuptias, (quia jam spes omnes sic suas impleverat,) diuturni pervicaciis morbi patientia superatis, non illibenter sato cessit.Anno Dom. 1660.—Dec. 28. Aet. 39.They had one only daughter, Elizabeth, who married sir Francis Henry Lee, baronet, of Ditchley in OxfordshireEx epitaph. modo citat., by whom she had two sons, Edward-Henry, created earl of Litchfield by Charles IICollins, Peer. ii. 390. Ed. i., grandfather by this match to Henry earl of Litchfield, chancellor of the university of Oxford: and Francis-Henry, a gentleman-commoner of Trinity college aforesaidEx Registr. in Pergamen. coll. Trin. ab ann. 1683. fol. 6.. She was afterwards married to Robert earl of LindseyRegistr. praedict. And MSS. Wood, modo citat.—Wood in another MS. mentions Philip Bertie, a younger son of Rob. earl of Lindsey, of Trin. coll. who speaks a copy of English verses, in the theatre at Oxford, 1683, to the duke and dutchess of York, the lady Anne, &c. They were written by Creech, then A.B. of Wadham college, and are printed in EXAMEN POETICUM, or vol. iii. of Miscellany Poems. D. 19. 4to. pag. 56. MSS. Mus. ASHM. In Monmouth's Rebellion, in the year 1685, the same Philip Bertie, being half-nephew to the Earl of Abingdon then Lord Lieutenant of Oxfordshire, was Captain of a company chiefly of his own college, in the militia of the University, which he trained in Trinity college grove. Wood, MSS. ibid. pag. 76. b. Under that year, I find the following notices relating to this business in Comp. Burss. Coll. Trin. Oxon. viz. 1685. "Dat. Tubicinibus Comitis de Abingdon, xs." Again, "Pro armamentis Collegii expoliendis et emendandis, xvis."—And, "Pro festivis ignibus [bonfires] post devictos rebelles, il. xijs. xd." In the same COMPUTUS are disbursements for horses hired to serve against the rebels.These notices relating to the troops raised by the university of Oxford in Monmouth's rebellion, remind me of a curious anecdote concerning Smith's famous Ode entitled POCOCKIUS, which I give from MSS. COD. BALLARD, vol. xix. Letter 104. "In Monmouth's REBELLION, the university of Oxford raised a regiment for the King's service, and Christ Church and Jesus college made one Company, of which lord Norris, since earl of Abingdon, was captain: who presented Mr. Urry a Corporal [Serjeant] therein with a halbard. Upon Dr. Pocock's death, Mr. Urry lugged Captain Rag [Smith] into his chamber in Peckwater, locked him in, put the key in his pocket, and ordered his bedmaker to supply him with necessaries through the window, and told him he should not come out, till he made a copy of verses on the Doctor's death. The sentence being irreversible, the captain made the ODE, and sent it with this Epistle to Mr. Urry, who was a well built man, and large limbed: who [Smith] thereupon had his release." Pococke died in 1691. Urry, a student of Christ-church, was the editor of Chaucer. The EPISTLE, here mentioned, is a ludicrous prose analysis of the ODE, beginning Opusculum tuum, Halberdarie amplissime, &c. and is lately printed in Dr. Johnson's ENGLISH POETS. vol. 4. p. 62. The writer of this anecdote is Mr. William Brome of Ewithington in Herefordshire, who died, aged 82, in 1745. He was of Merton college Oxford, an excellent scholar, and a very learned antiquary: intimately acquainted with Smith and Urry, and with Lord Oxford, John Philips, &c. In one of his LETTERS he says, that Philips dedicated and sent to him the SPLENDID SHILLING in manuscript, and that he sent Philips in return a pound of tobacco. Ibid. LETT. 78. Compare LETTERS, 72. 74.. Of this lady there

is a capital picture at lord Litchfield's at Ditchley, by sir Peter Lely.
I now return to Thomas Pope, the second son of William first earl of Downe, uncle to Thomas above-mentioned the second earl, and ancestor to Francis the present lord Guildford. He was born 1598At Wroxton there is a picture, dated 1606, of William Pope, aged 10, and of his brother Thomas, here mentioned, aged 8.. He was knighted by Charles I. at the royal manor of Woodstock, Aug. 1, 1625MSS. Dugdale, Mus. Ashmol. R. fol. 232.. He married at Wroxton, Apr. 20, 1636, Beata, Daughter of Sir Henry Poole of Saperton in Gloucestershire, baronetRegistr. Wroxton. There is a valuable portrait of this lady at Wroxton, by the second Vansomer.. He appeared in arms for the royal cause. On the death of his nephew Thomas, he became by succession, Decemb. 28, 1660, a baronet, and third earl of Downe. He died Jan. 11, 1667, and was buried at Wroxton: as was his countess Beata, Jul. 18, 1678Registr. Wroxton.. They had three sons, Thomas, Henry, and a second Henry; and five daughters, Elenor, Anne, Beata, Frances, and Finetta. Thomas was born, 1640, and on the death of his father, Jan. 11, 1667, became by succession a baronet, and fourth

and last earl of DowneThere are pictures at Ditchley of the two last earls of Downe.. These dignities he enjoyed but a few months; for he died May 18, 1668Registr. Wroxton., and was buried with his ancestors, in a vault under the chancel at Wroxton. The first Henry was born Apr. 11, 1643, and died an infantIbid.. The second Henry was born Jan. 27, 1645Ibid., and died at Oxford in Trinity college, where he was a student, aged 19, Jun. 20, 1665Ex Tumul. ibid. I find the countess of Downe, his mother, making a present to the college, "in memoriam filii sui Dni Henrici Pope hujus collegii comm. defuncti." Registr. ibid. in pergamen. ab ann. 1665, fol. 46. Where she is called, by mistake, Elisabetha instead of Beata.. Of the daughters, Elenor died an infant 1637Registr. Wroxton.. Anne was born 1637Ibid., and married sir Edward Boughton, baronet, of Lawford in WarwickshireMSS. Pedigr. Rawlins.. Beata, born 1639, was married Febr. 15, 1668, to William Soames, esquire, of Thurlowe in SuffolkRegistr. Wroxton.. Frances, born 1647, was married March 5, 1671, to sir Francis North, afterwards lord keeper, and lord North of of GuildfordIbid.; and from this match, grandfather to the present Francis lord North and Guildford. She died Nov. 15, 1678Ex Epitaphio., and was buried at Wroxton;

where is an epitaph on her monument, written by Dr. Henry Paman, public orator of the university of Cambridge, who is said to have been well acquainted with her amiable characterNorth's Life of lord keeper North, 4to. p. 84.. The youngest daughter, Finetta, was married May 4, 1674, to Robert Hyde, esquireRegistr. Wroxton. See Wood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 543.—f. 235., son of Alexander Hyde, bishop of SalisburyWhose elder brother Laurence Hyde, esquire, of Heale near Salisbury, married MARY the daughter of ANTONY WARTON, rector of Bremor in Hamshire, about the reign of Charles the first, and great grandfather to the father of the author of this work. This lady, when a widow, for many days concealed and accommodated in her house at Heale, aforesaid, king Charles the second after his hazardous flight from the battle of Worcester, in the year 1651, and furnished the means for his escape into France. At the restoration, the king gave her a very valuable picture of himself, when a boy, a half-length, painted by Vandyck, and now in the possession of my brother doctor Warton of Winchester. See Clarendon's HIST. vol. iii. p. 331. edit. fol. 1704.. Thus by the death of male issue, and marriage of the female, this family and name, at least in this branch, became extinct soon after the restoration of Charles the second.For from what is here collected on this subject, it must appear, that our great poet, ALEXANDER POPE, was related to this family only by some collateral branch. I have mentioned all the male issue, and their marriages; except the marriages of John

and William, two younger sons of sir William Pope knight, of Cogges: both which, I suspect, died young; but if ever married, either of them may reasonably be supposed rather too youngThe eldest of them, John, was born Nov. 2, 1623. If it can be proved that he was the father of the elder Alexander Pope, it will follow that Thomas Pope, second earl of Downe, was his uncle: and consequently, that sir Thomas Pope, the founder of Trinity college, was the poet's uncle, to a high degree. It may perhaps be trifling to mention, that ALEXANDER POPE occurs twice as a name in this family, in, and about, Temp. Edw. iii.—MSS. Pedigr. penes honoratiss. com. de Guildford. to have been the father of the elder Alexander Pope, who was born 1642Ex Epitaphio.. Besides, had the poet been descended from either of these two younger sons, the title of earl of Downe could not have failed during his own and his father's life-time. Mr. Pope tells us, that, his "Father [Alexander] was of a gentleman's family in Oxfordshire, the head of which was the earl of Downe, whose sole heiress married the earl of Lindsey. His mother was the daughter of W. Turnor of York: She had three brothers, one of whom was killed, anothes died in the service of king Charles." Notwithstanding what I have here said, I imagine that Mr. Pope alludes to Thomas Pope the second earl of Downe, whose epitaph I have given, no less than to his mother's brothers, in the following lines.Of gentle blood, part shed in honour's cause,While yet in Britain honour had applause,EACH PARENT sprungWarb. POPE, iv. 43. ed. 1752.—And on the whole from my researches on this head I am inclined to determine, that our poet was descended from a branch of this family, viz. POPE of DEDINGTONThomas Pope, grandfather of William Pope, sir Thomas Pope's father, had seven sons: William, the eldest, married Jane Bonde. MSS. Pedigr. modo citat. penes honoratiss. comde Guildford., which settled at Ginge, near Wantage in Berkshire. They have still, or lately had, in the family, which I believe has now lost the name of Pope, a picture of sir Thomas Pope, and escocheons of his arms.For the convenience of the reader, the following short Scheme, being a comprehensive recapitulation of what has been said, both here and in the LIFE, concerning this family, with some improvements, is annexed.NUMB. XXVII.GULIELMUS Pope de Dedington, co. Oxon. Gen. ob. 1523.Habuit Filium primogenitum THOMAM POPE, MIL. FUNDATOREM COLL. TRIN. OXON. 1554. on. 1558. JAN. 29. Qui habuit Fratrem unicum, praeter tres Sorores, JOHANNEM Pope de Wroxton, co. Oxon. Armig. ob. 1583.Habuit Filium, praeter duos alios, et sex Filias, GULIELMUM Pope, nat. 1573. factum Equit. de Baln. 1603. Baronett. 1611. Comitem de Downe, 1629. ob. 1631.Habuit Filios duos, praeter unicam Filiam,MAJOREM, 
GULIELMUM Pope, nat. 1596. factum mil. 1616. ob. vivo Gulielmo Patre, 1624.Habuit filium, praeter alios, et duas filias, THOMAM Pope, nat. 1622. baronett. et com. sec. de Downe, mortuo avo GULIEMO, 1631. ob. 1660.Habuit unicam filiam, et haeredem, ELISABETHAM Pope, nuptam D. FRANCISCO - HENRICO Lee de Ditchley, co. Oxon. BaronettoRenuptam Roberto Comiti de Lindsey..Habuere filium, praeter alium, EDWARDUM-FRANCISCUM Lee, Baronett. factum comitem de Litchfield, 1674. ob. 1716.GEORGIUM-HENRICUM Lee. com. de Litchfield, 1716, ob. 1743.GEORGIUM-HENRICUM Lee, com. de Litchfield. 1743. Nuper academiae Oxon. honoratissimum cancellarium, 1772.MINOREM, 
THOMAM Pope, nat. 1598. factum mil. 1625. baronett. et com. tert. de Downe, mortuo THOMA nepote, 1660. ob. 1668.Habuit filium, praeter duos alios et filias quinqne, THOMAM Pope, nat. 1640. com. quart. et ult. de Downe, 1668. ob. eod. anno.Qui habuit in cohaeredem, una cum duabus e siliabus praedictis, FRANCISCAM Pope, nat. 1647. ob, 1678. Nuptam D. FRANCISCO North, facto baroni de Guildford, 1683. ob. 1685.Habuere filium, praeter tres alios, et filias duas, FRANCISCUM North, bar. de Guildford, 1685. ob. 1729.FRANCISCUM North, bar. de Guildford, 1729. com. 1752. Hodie superstitem, 1772. Titulis omnibus et honoribus majorem.NUMB. XXVIII. Account of Sir Thomas Pope's Burial, 1559From MSS. Cotton. fol. Vitellius, F. 5. Brit. Mus. It is a journal of occurrences chiefly in and about London, by a cotemporary and a curious observer, from 4 Edw. vi. to 5 Eliz. viz. 1563. This article is almost the only one, of any length, now remaining clear and legible in the whole manuscript; which in many parts is burnt to a cinder, and otherwise much injured.."THE vi day of ffebruary whent to the churche to be beried at ClarkenwellThis is inaccurately said. The body only laid in state in the church of Clerkenwell. sir Thomas Pope knyght, with a standarde, a cottCoat., pennon of armes, a targett, ellmett and sworde, and iiii dosen of armes, and xii for the branchys, and vi for the bodie, of bokeram: and ii haroldsHeralds. of armes, Mr. ClarenchusClarencieux. and Mr. Yorke. Mr. Clarenchus bare the cott, and Mr. Yorke bare the helmett and crest. The gayff xl

mantyll ffrys gownes [to] xx men and xx women: the xx men bare torchys, the women ii and ii together, with rayles. And ii grett whyt branchys and iv branchys [of] taperys of wax; garnissshed with armes and with iv dosen of pensels. Sir Richard Sowthwell, knyght, and sir Thomas Stradling, and dyvers oders morners in blake, to the nomber of lx and mo in blake. And all the howsse and the chyrche with blake and armes: And aftyr, to the playse to drynke with spyse-brede and wyneSo at abbot Islip's funeral in Westminster abbey, 1532. The dirge being sung, they were entertained with "spiced bread, suckett, marmylate, spiced plate, and divers sorts of wine." Widmore's WEST. ABBEY, p. 208.. And the morrow masse iii songes, with ii pryke songes, and the iii [third] of Requiem, with the clarkes of LondonA society of singers who were hired to assist on these occasions. See HIST. ENGL. POETR. ii. p. 396.. And after, he was beried: And that done, to the playse to dener; for ther was a grett dener, and plente of all thynges, and a grett doll of moneySee LIFE, p. 178. From this passage Strype drew what is mentioned in his ANNALS. VIZ. "And sir Thomas Pope, a great man with the former queen [Mary,] buried with much much magnificence in Clerkenwell." [r. Walbroke.] Vol. i. p. 32. Lond. 1725.."NUMB. XXIX. Account of the Founder's Visit to Trinity College Oxford, on St. Swithin's Day, 1556MSS. Wise. This paper was transcribed by the late Rev. Francis Wise, fellow of Trinity college, and Radclivian librarian, from the original, which was in the possession of the learned Dr. Arthur Charlett, master of University college, and formerly fellow of Trinity college. It was written in the hand of Dr. Arthur Yeldard, the second president of Trinity college; and seemed to be intended for an entry in the college-register, where it does not appear. Mr. Wise told me, that he saw other original papers relating to Trinity college in Dr. Charlett's library. Dr. Charlett seems to have made these collections for a work which he left behind him in manuscript, entitled, "An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Presidents, Fellows, Scholars, and Benefactors of Trinity college, Oxford, to the year 1692." This catalogue was in the hands of Mr. Rawlins, of Pophills in Gloucestershire, but is not now to be found. See what is said of it in Hearne's MSS. Collections, vol. 130. pag. 110. sub. ann. Bibl. Bodl. cod. Rawlins. And compare LIFE, p. 178. in the notes. In a letter from Dr. Richard Rawlinson to Mr. George Ballard, author of the LEARNED LADIES, dated Jun. 16, 1751, is the following passage. "Since my last, I call to mind that our friend Mr. Rawlins actually sold some of his MSS. Particularly I remember a large folio of Miscellanies [miscellaneous papers] mostly relating to Oxford, and partly in Dr. Charlet's hand, sold to Mr. Taylor of Worcestershire: as also a copy of Wood's Antiquities of Oxford, Latin, with originals [interpolations] by Mr. Wood himself, &c." LETTERS, Cod. Ballard. vol. ii. LET. 138. folio. Bibl. Bodl..SCIANT posteri, quod ad collegium venit D. Fundator in festo Sancti Swithini, A.D. 1556. Ei ab equo descendenti adstitit ad frena magister

Praesidens: et mox, in porta collegii, oratione satis longa et officii plena exceptus est a magistro Markes, vice-praesidente; ubi etiam humiliter eidem obtulerunt et donarunt bursarii cirothecas aurifrigiatas. Dein ad magnam praesidentis cameram eunt, sociis et scholaribus utrinque stantibus. Comitabantur autem D. Fundatorem episcopi WintoniensisBut he was not yet inthroned. He had custody of the Temporalities, 16 Maii, 1556. Rym. Foed. xv. 437. And the licence of election is dated Jul. 16. ib. 441. See supr. LIFE, p. 237. et Eliensis, aliique plures ex aula magnates. Postquam Bibliothecam et Arbustum lustraverant, ad prandium in magna aula collegii processum est: ubi laute et opipare convivium instruebatur, ad laevum D. Fundatoris, paulo tamen distantius, adsidente Praesidente, ac dein ordine caeteris. In hoc convivium, in quo aderant etiam duodecim ministralli, et afferebantur inter alia plurima quatuor pingues damae, necnon octo lagenae Muscadeli, allocabant bursarii xijl. xivs. ixd. Quin et pro cirothecis xxivs. xjd. Post, ad missam vespertinam in choro capellae praesens erat dictus D. Fundator, cum

episcopis et aliis, ubi divina celebrabat Praesidens optima capa indutusWho is ordered to celebrate "in festis magis duplicibus, et principalibus, et in die Exequiarum mearum, totum diei Officium ac Missam, cum diacono et subdiacono." STATUT. Coll. Trin. Cap. xiii.. Et obtulit D. Fundator unam bursam plenam Angelorum. Hujus autem diei totas expensas statim ante discessum, pro sua munificentia, rependebat integre D. Fundator in manus bursariorum, in scaccario computi, una cumLeg. Cypho. ciffo argenteo deaurato. Dictus autem ciffus statim ibidem implebatur vino mediatoLegend. f. medicato., vocato Ipocrasse, et ex eo sine mora propinabat D. Fundator Bursariis et aliis praesentibus. Ac denique divertebat eo vespere versus Windlesoram. Ac dedit D. Fundator unicuique scholarium propria manu unum marcam.NUMB. XXX. Testimonium de Dom. Elisabetha Paulet, D. Thomae Pope uxore secunda. A Radulpho Kettell conscriptumManu sua, inter chartas manuscriptas A. Wood, Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Viz. A loose paper inserted in A. Wood's MS. ENGLISH History of the University of Oxford, tom. ii. fol. 388. Dr. Ralph Kettel was president of Trinity college, and an excellent governor, for near fifty years. He had been fellow and scholar of the college for fourteen years, during the life-time of this lady. His family lived in her neighbourhood, at King's Langley in Hertfordshire. She probably sent him to the college, where he was admitted scholar, Jun. 16, 1579. Registr. prim. fol. 30. He was chaplain to Bilson bishop of Winchester, and to lady Walsingham, widow of the Secretary. A good old portrait of him, in a brown furred gown, is in the college. Aubrey says, that his picture was drawn by Mr. Bathurst, one of the foundation of Trinity college, from memory three years after his death, which was a strong likeness. SURREY, tom. v. p. 406. His Life, but with many mistakes and absurdities, is among Aubrey's manuscript LIVES in the Ashmolean Museum.The following anecdote is recorded of Dr. Kettel, which I relate, because it is imperfectly told by Aubrey, and as it marks the times. While president, it was his custom to attend daily the DISPUTATIONS in the college-hall, on which occasion he constantly wore a large black-furred muff. Before him stood an hour-glass, brought by himself into the hall, and placed on a table, for ascertaining the time of the continuance of the exercise, which was to last an hour at least. One morning, after Cromwell's soldiers had taken possession of Oxford, a halberdier rushed into the hall during this ceremony, and plucking off our venerable doctor's muff, threw it in his face; and then with a stroke of his halberd broke the hour-glass in pieces. The doctor, though old and infirm, instantly seized the soldier by the collar, who was soon overpowered by the assistance of the disputants. The halberd was carried out of the hall in triumph before the doctor; but the prisoner, with his halberd, was quickly rescued by a party of soldiers, who stood at the bottom of the hall, and had enjoyed the whole transaction. MS. Papers of Dr. Bathurst.."ELIZABETHA, inter clarissimas foeminas, ob corporis animique praestantes dotes, ingenium,

multiplicem cognitionem, sermonis facundiam, morum integritatem, pietatem, et munificentiam merito celebranda, orta ex BLOUNTORUM splendida familia in comitatu Staffordiensi de Burton ad Trent, connubio tradita est ANTONIO BASFORD, viro inter armigeros insigni. Qui, suscepto filio unico JOANNE Basford, ELIZABETHAM reliquit superstitem, fama vitaque adeo celebrem, ut venerabilis Fundator noster THOMAS POPE, tunc temporis, opibus, dignitate, et gratia, apud omnes ordines plurimum pollens, hanc sibi consortem dignissimam adsciverit. Quae jam denuo conjux facta, propendebat admodum in opera quaeque insigniora; inter quae collegium hoc meritissime reponimus. Ad quod fundandum, omni conatu et suasu Fundatorem nostrum continuo

adhortata est. Unde evenit, ut ubi A. 1558Sc. 1558-9., Januarii 29, dominica Sexagesima, a Clerkenwell ad electos suos spiritus deus dictum THOMAM transtulerit, ELIZABETHAM autem ad plebis suae Christianae summum solatium superesse voluerit, Fundator huic summam auctoritatem et potestatem in nos, Alumnos ipsius, demandaverit. Hinc, magis magisque illustris, et conspicua omnigenis virtutibus, nupsit venerabili atque inter splendidos militaris ordinis viros egregio, HUGONI POWLETT Somersetensi. Ita nuperrime Domina Powlett appellari coepit, apud George-Hinton inter Somersetenses, apud Tittenhanger inter Hartfordienses, et apud Clerkenwell inter suburbanos Londinenses, celeberrima. Hujus memoriam singulari cum pietate et observantia recolimus, collegii hujus alumni: cum ob auctotatem, quam ei, quousque in vivis esser, Fundator contulit; tum ob munificentiam, quam dum vixit exercuit in nos: quaque ad rem literariam confirmandam, et rem familiarem amplificandam, quotannis in perpetuum gaudere hoc collegium voluit electa DominaThe circumstances of her whole benefaction where these. Richard Blount of LondonI find one Richard Blount, admitted a gentleman-commoner, Jan. 31. 1579. And leaving the college, Feb. 28. 1581. E Libro primo Cautionum., esquire, her nephew, bequeathed by will 100l. to maintain an exhibitioner in the said college. On his death, dame Elisabeth Powlet covenanted with Blount's executors, to give to the said college, in consideration of the said sum of 100l. to her made over, the rectory of Ridge in Hertfordshire, for the maintenance of the said exhibitioner, and for the purposes mentioned in the text. She added also, in the contract, the advowson to the vicarage of Ridge, now lost. "For the great affection, good will, and favour, which she the same dame Elisabeth beareth towards the sayde college, being founded by her late deare husband sir Thomas Pope." Ex Indentur. Dat. April 1, an. 22 Elizab. Regin. A.D. 1581.This Memoir was probably drawn up by Dr. Kettel, as was the preceding narrative of the Founder's Visit to the College, by Dr. Yeldard, with an intention of inserting it in the collegeregister: but, like that, it was mislaid or forgotten, and never entered. See p. 458. supr. in the notes. The manuscript seems to have been procured by Antony Wood from Dr. Ralph Bathurst, who became possessed of many of Dr. Kettel's papers.. Utcunque enim veneranda

matrona, hinc a Tyttenhanger A. 1593, 27 Octobris, ad superos concesserit; accesserunt tamen ad Lectoris philosophici et rhetorici stipendia duplicanda, atque ad Focalium onus sublevandum, in annos singulos decem librae, ex ejusdem larga beneficentia."FINIS.