LINES, &c.By THOMAS PAINE,THE Rain pours down, the City looks forlorn,And gloomy subjects suit the howling morn,Close by my sire, with door and window fast,And safely shelter'd from the driving blast,To gayer thoughts, I bid a days adieu,To spend a scene of solitude with you.So oft has black Revenge engros'd the care,Of all the leisure hours man finds to spare;So oft has guilt in all her thousand dens,Call'd for the vengeance of chastising Pens;That while, I fain would ease my heart on you,No thought is left untold, no passion new.From flight to flight the mental path appears,Worn with the steps of near six thousand years,And filld througout with every scene of pain.From CAIN to G*****, and back from G***** to CAIN.Alike in cruelty, alike in hate,In guilt alike, but more alike in fate,Both curs'd supremely for the blood they drew,Each from the rising world, while each was new.Go second CAIN, true likeness of the first,And strew thy blasted head with homely dustIn ashes sit—in wretched sack-cloth weepAnd with unpitied sorrows cease to slee,Go haunt the tombs, and single out the placeWhere earth itself shall suffer a disgrace.Go spell the letters on some mouldring urn,And ask if he who sleeps there can return.Go count the numbers that in sile lie,And learn by study what it is to die,For sure that heart—if any heart you ownConceits that man expires without a Groan:That he who lives receives from you a grace,Or death is nothing but a change of place:That peace is dull, that joy from sorrow springs,And War the Royal raree shew of things,Else why these senes that wound the feeling mindThis sport of death—this Cockpit of Mankind.Why sobs the widow in perpetual pain?Why cries the Orphan?—"Oh my Father's slain"Why hangs the Sire his paralytic head?And nods with manly grief—"My Son is dead."Why drops the tears from off the sisters cheek?And sweetly tells the sorrows she would speak,Or why in lonely steps does pensive John?To all the neighbours tell, "Poor masters gone."Oh could I paint the passion, I can feel,Or point a horror that would wound like steelTo thy unfeeling, unrelenting mindI'd send a torture and relieve mankind.Thou that art husband, father, brother, allThe tender names which kindred learn to call.Yet like an image carv'd in massey stone,Thou bear'st the shape, but sentiment has't none,Allied by dust and figure, not by mind,Thou only herd'st, but liv'st not with mankind.And prone to love, like some outrageous ape,Thou know'st each class of beings by their shape.Since then no hopes to civilize remainAnd all petitions have gone forth in vain,One prayer is left which dreads no proud reply,That he who made thee breath will make thee die.COMMON SENSE.Passages for Insertion in the Hiatuses.In the INTRODUCTION.No. 1. "by the King and Parliament they have" Page 2No. 2. "reject the oppressions oeither" —No. 3. "nor a General as in England a man" Page 11No. 4. "In England the king hath little" —No. 5. "by the king and hs" page 13No. 6. "made known, I rejected the hardened, sullen-temper'd Phaaoh of England for ever; and disdained the wretch that with the pretended title of "FATHER OF HIS PEO∣PLE▪" can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter, and com∣posedly sleep with their blood upon his soul! —Bu Page 17No. 7. —"And as he hath shewn hmself such an inveterate enemy to Liberty▪ and discovered such a thirst for arbi∣trary power —Is he? or is he not a proper man"No. 8. "petitioning.— We are already greater than the king wishes us to be: and will he not endeavour hereafter to make us less?—To bring the" —No. 9. "lws, or whether the King, the greatest enemy we have, or can have, shall tell us, "There shall be no laws but such as I like?—But" —No. 10. "dangerous and fatal than it" Page 18No. 11. "policy in the king at this" —No. 12. "reinstating himself in the government of the Pro∣vinces in order that he may accomplish by fraud and subtity in the long run, what he cannot do by force and violence in the short one: Reconciliation and Ruin are nearly related. Secondly."No. 13. havock of mankind, like the royal brute of Great-Britain. —Yet that" Page 20No. 14. "eternal tyranny, by keeping vacant the seat of Go∣vernment. —There are" —No. 15. the tyranny but the TYRANT—Stand forth!" Page 21No. 16. it camut, the King's Speech made" Page 28No. 17. "revenge. And the king's speech, instead of terrify." —No. 18. naturally follows, that the king's speech, as being a piece of finished villainy, deserved"No. 19. "that the king's speech hath not before" —No. 20. "The speech, if it may be" —No. 21. "of kings; for a Nature" —No. 22. "The speech hath one" —No. 23. "savage than the King of Great-Britain. — Sir" Page 28No. 24. "like a worm. However it matters very little now, what the king either says or does. He has wcke broken through every moral and human obligation; Na∣ture and Conscience underfoot; and by a steady and con∣stitutional spirit of insolence and cruelty, procured for him∣self an universal hatred!—It it now" Page 29No. 25. "the King and his worthless" Page 30No. 26. "authority under him whom yeNo. 27. "tell the wretch his s, and warn"No. 28. "a proof that the man whom ye are so"